# From the Birth of Intermedial Thinking to the Concept of Remediation: The Mediatic Phase of Intermediality

## Introduction

Henry Jenkins, the keynote speaker at the founding conference of the
International Society for Intermedial Studies (ISIS), held in Cluj,
Romania in October 2013, opened his remarks by expressing surprise at
the turnout. It wasn't false modesty; he was genuinely baffled that the
250 intermedialists in attendance, few of whom were specialists in media
or communications, should be interested in his work and that of his
colleagues at MIT's Comparative Media Studies Program. The
intermedialists hailed from other disciplines in the social sciences and
humanities: literature, art history, cinema, music, video, theater,
linguistics, history, philosophy, anthropology. Two days later, the
author of *Convergence Culture* recovered from his surprise. At the end
of the plenary session that closed the first ISIS conference, he
remarked, 'I assume that what I have been doing for years is
intermediality or has something to do with intermediality'. To the
attendees, this was self-evident.

This telling anecdote speaks to a readily observable fact: intermedial
research is more common than one might think, but it often appears under
other names, and is dictated by disciplinary convention, institutional
constraints and editorial policies that occur in the parts of the world
where it is conducted.

Born in the wake of what Milad Doueihi calls the 'great digital
conversion[^1] and what is commonly referred to as the 'digital
revolution', intermedial studies are barely 30 years old. That's not
much, considering the dispersal and often isolation of the first
intermedial researchers, an isolation that was aggravated precisely by
the profusion of labels used to describe their subject matter. It took
almost 10 years -- from the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s -- before bridges
were built between some of the research groups and the first
international research network began to take shape. And it was another
20 years before an international scientific association devoted to
intermedial studies was formed with the ISIS founding conference in
Cluj, October 24-26, 2013.

While the scattered emergence of intermedial thinking impeded the
discipline's growth, it also attests to the supranational and
supradisciplinary scope of the intermedial approach, and the ubiquity of
the gaps it addresses. Those gaps are not confined to the lightning-fast
digital invasion, which has radically transformed our lives since the
end of the 20^th^ century, but existed during the pre-digital age, as
well. As Espen J. Aarseth observed in one of the foundational texts of
game studies,[^2] information technology did not make the cybertext
possible; cybertexts existed before computers and cybertextual thinking
dates back several millennia. In support of this assertion, Aarseth
shows how the famous Chinese book of changes, the *I Ching,* which dates
back to the Zhou dynasty (1027-256 BC), was already a cybertext. The
intermedial approach likewise investigates processes that extend into
the distant past. Researchers such as Peter Boenisch[^3] argue that
intermedial processes have existed since the invention of the alphabet,
and interartistic theoreticians[^4] regard the complex, ceaseless
relationships between artistic disciplines since antiquity as compelling
models of intermedial dynamics. One of the first propositions advanced
by the intermedialists was that the arts are media, indeed the oldest
media, and that intermedial phenomena date back tens of millennia.

The term intermediality first gained currency in Germany, Belgium, the
Netherlands and Canada. Germany may be considered the birthplace of
intermedial thinking, while Canada was the site of the first scientific
research center devoted to it, the Centre de recherches
intermediales/Centre for Intermedial Research (CRI) at the Université de
Montréal, founded in 1997. However, for the reasons we have mentioned,
the term 'intermediality' remained confined to a small circle of
researchers, even as studies in the field, such as those conducted by
Henry Jenkins at MIT, proliferated. In other words, intermedial
reflection developed steadily and was constantly enriched, unbeknownst
to the researchers themselves. A few examples: in 2000, the American
researchers Jay David Bolter and Robert Grusin published what would be
considered a groundbreaking work in intermedial studies: *Remediation.
Understanding New Media*[^5]. The concept of remediation they develop is
at the heart of intermedial dynamics. But nowhere in their 295-page tome
do the words 'intermedial' or 'intermediality' appear. The same is true
of other seminal texts in the evolution of intermedial thinking in the
US since the late 1980s. In *When Old Technologies Were New*,[^6] which
may be considered one of the foundational texts of American intermedial
studies, Carolyn Marvin discusses how, as the use of electricity became
widespread in the 19^th^ century, electrical media emerged by
cannibalizing each other, transforming interpersonal relationships and
social behaviour in the process. Her book came out at the same time as
the first essays by German intermedialists on related themes, but they
do not appear to have been aware of each other.

In 1999, as digital technologies were invading the theatrical stage,
Philip Auslander's iconoclastic book *Liveness: Performance in a
Mediatized Culture*[^7] took aim at the deep-rooted idea that the direct
physical co-presence (in the same place, in the flesh) of senders and
receivers in a venue such as the theater and technological mediatization
were irreconcilable. Auslander argued that those distinctions born of
the operation of electrical media in the late 19^th^ century cannot
withstand the reality test: liveness may be mediatized and still be
live. In 2003, Jonathan Sterne published another key intermedial work:
not only did *The Audible Past*[^8] revolutionize sound studies, but it
also expanded intermedial analysis to the world of sound, uncovering the
full complexity of mediation processes and underlining the hazards of
transposing concepts from visual studies to sound studies. In *Always
Already New: Media, History, and the Data of Culture*,[^9] Lisa Gitelman
questions whether what were then referred to, by researchers and in
society in general , as 'new media' in the industry really were new.
Adapting and developing Derrida's well-known phrase, she contends that
all media were always already new. Gitelman's analysis was grounded in a
synthetic definition of media to which no intermedialist, in the US or
elsewhere, would have objected at the time. She also clarifies and
enriches, without naming it, the central concept of remediation, while
Alexander R. Galloway questions it in *The Interface Effect*[^11] and
Craig Dworkin investigates modes of mediation in *No Medium*.[^12] In
the same year as the publication of Galloway's *The Interface Effect,*
Erkki Huhtamo and Jussi Paikka's *What Is Media Archaeology?*[^13]
marked the arrival of media archaeology as a recognized scientific
discipline. Archeology is one of the main branches of intermediality and
the remediation model is one of its cornerstones.

Other important texts in narratology and studies of adaptation,
reception, electroacoustics, literature and the early cinema published
during this period also adopted an intermedial perspective, but none of
those books and articles that so shaped the development of thinking
about intermediality, not only in the US but around the world, contained
the word 'intermediality'.

The same observation can be made about intermedial studies in the
French-speaking world, with the exception of research activities in
Canada around the Centre de recherche sur l\'intermédialité at the
Université de Montréal. Works by Philippe Marion on linkages between
media,[^14] by François Odin on the 'births' of cinema, by Jean-Luc
Déotte on the concept of apparatus[^15] and by the Toulouse group[^16]
on the concept of device explore issues in intermediality without
calling them by this name. Texts by Jacques Rancière on the medium and,
more recently, on the (emancipated) spectator,[^17] by Daniel Sibony on
the in-between[^18] and by Deleuze on cinema (particularly the crystal
image)[^19] made such important contributions to intermedial studies
that they would certainly warrant inclusion on any list of essential
readings in intermediality, but none were, at the time, published under
the banner of 'intermediality'.

This first observation leads us to a second. To this day, in the minds
of many observers of the social sciences and humanities in general, and
the field of arts and media in particular, intermediality boils down to
the junction of artistic practices, most often in the form of a
technology transfer from one practice to another: using projected images
in theatrical productions, turning movies into video games, using
photographs in literary texts, and so forth. Certainly, these are all
examples of intermedial dynamics, but intermediality is much more than
this, as we will show.

## Historical Overview

For nearly 20 years, up to the mid 2000s, intermedial research was
dominated by a fairly traditional conception of media, which we shall
discuss in a later chapter. Intermedial studies sprang from a paradox
that digital technology had lain bare: not only do media constantly
interact, but they are themselves the products of such interactions.
This singular dynamic became the focus of the intermedialists, who
sought to understand how, by what means and to what end it was produced.
But over the past 10 years or so, the picture has grown murkier as the
very concept of media has been challenged; indeed, whether such a thing
exists or has ever existed is questionable. The relatively brief history
of intermediality can therefore be divided into two periods: the
mediatic period and the postmediatic period. The first was founded on a
relatively traditional conception of media inherited from Marshall
McLuhan and communication theory. The second wrestled itself free from
that frame. The transition from one to the other illustrates
intermediality's arduous but successful struggle for emancipation from
the poststructuralist mindset from which it emerged.

As we understand it, intermediality refers at once to a field of study,
a dynamic and an approach.

-   As a field of study, it deals with complex, rich, polymorphous,
    multidirectional relations among 'mediating conjunctures'.[^20]

-   As a dynamic, intermediality is what makes the production and
    evolution of such 'mediating conjunctures' possible; it also leaves
    in its wake media residues, scraps of uncompleted mediation
    processes, the remnants of 'mediating conjunctures' that have passed
    into history.

-   Consequently, we call for an original approach that can yield a
    better understanding of this field and this dynamic.

For the first intermedialists, it was vitally important to grasp media
(to use the terminology of the day) as part of a larger dynamic from
which they drew their power. From the outset, therefore, the producers
and users of media played a central role in intermedial reflection, to
the same extent as the materiality of mediation processes. The early
intermedialists, particularly those interested in electrical media,
brought new and sustained attention to bear on the social environment
from which media emerge and on which they act. This interest in
sociality is worth noting because the first intermedialists were often
wrongly accused of technocentrism, when in fact they held that media
practices could not be dissociated from the individuals who were their
agents. The socialities associated with media or created by media --
from the first telephones to contemporary social networks -- are not
comparable to traditional social classes nor to stable communities;
hence the neologism 'sociomedialities' is used to refer to these
socialities that are specific to media and shaped by the processes of
naturalization and universalization that traverse media.[^21]

Etymologically, the term intermediality derives from 'intermedia' which,
as its morphology suggests, refers to what is located between media. The
word intermedia was first used in the American neo-avant-garde in the
1960s. Dick Higgins, co-founder of the multidisciplinary artistic
movement Fluxus, is credited with coining the term. Higgins was a poet
and composer who was heavily influenced by John Cage. Through a series
of experiments that decompartmentalized disciplines, media, techniques
and technologies, and effected transfers between them, Higgins and his
Fluxus confederates produced works that would now be described as
intermedial, since they harnessed multiple media (or arts) -- which is
characteristic of multimediality -- for purposes of artistic production,
presentation and experience (when the work involved user experience).
Their approach was not entirely new, insofar as its creative logic was
consistent with that of the historical avant-garde and rested on a
thoroughly conventional conception of media. They understood a medium to
be a discrete entity, one that is identifiable, separable and relatively
stable and independent, as were the dominant electronic media of the
time (radio, television, cinema). In that 'pre-intermedial' age, media
were perceived as monads, defined sometimes on the basis of their
real-world effects, sometimes on the basis of their structure and
workings.

Friedrich Kittler,[^22] Frédéric Barbier and Catherine
Bertho-Lavenir[^23] subscribe to the first approach: they define media
by what they do. According to Kittler, 'a medium archives things,
transmits things or processes things'.[^24] For Barbier and
Bertho-Lavenir, a medium is

> \[a\]ny system of communication that allows a society to perform any
> or all of three essential functions: conservation, remote
> communication of messages and knowledge, and the updating of cultural
> and political practices.[^25]

These definitions make no mention of the material dimension of media or
the role of the user in the process. Éliséo Véron proposes a
structuralist approach that encompasses these factors:

> A medium is ... a constellation composed of a technology *PLUS* the
> social practices of production and appropriation of that technology,
> when there is public access to the messages (regardless of the
> conditions of access, which usually involve payment).[^26]

Understood as the practical application of knowledge to a specific field
and the resulting ability to perform tasks, technology includes artistic
practices. While the arts are distinguished from 'other' media by
certain qualities and functions that make them, according to Lars
Elleström's term, 'qualified media', they are media nevertheless. The
elements Véron gathers under the heading 'technology *PLUS* practices'
roughly correspond to the general but highly complex concept of
'device', which is central to intermedial theory and which we shall
discuss later.

Like media archeologists, intermedialists attach considerable importance
to the question of practice and related protocols and values, which
often account for a medium's success or lack thereof. Practice is
inseparable from the concept of 'device'.

We should note here two fundamental aspects of intermedial thinking: the
question of usage, which belongs to the sociomedial dimension of media,
and the material side of all mediation, which belongs to the technical
and technological dimension. These are also the two facets of a device
in Foucault's sense. Lisa Gitelman's synthetic definition of media
embraces these elements:

> I define media as socially realized structures of communication, where
> structures include both technological forms and their associated
> protocols, and where communication is a cultural practice, a
> ritualized collocation of different peaple on the same mental map,
> sharing or engaged with popular ontologies of representation.[^27]

While stressing the importance of sociomedialities, Gitelman's
definition remains attached to the concept of structure inherited from
communication theory, which, as we shall see, intermediality has
gradually abandoned.

The word intermediality originally appeared in German
(*Intermedialität*). It is believed to have been used for the first time
by media philosophers (e.g. Ole Hansen-Löve in 1983) and then spread to
media studies, where it was popularized by the German scholar Jürgen E.
Müller,[^28] a dominant figure in the foundational period of
intermediality, just as the word intermedia migrated from the artistic
practice of the Fluxus group to the realm of media theory.

> At that period \[the 80s\], the isolating tendencies of media theories
> and histories and the rather banal fact that no medium could be
> considered as a 'monade' have motivated me and also some other
> scholars to direct our attention towards the intricate and complex
> processes of media interactions or media encounters. The notion of
> intermediality was based on the assumption that there are no pure
> media and that media would integrate structures, procedures,
> principles, concepts, questions of other media which have been
> developed in the history of Western media and would play with these
> elements.[^29]

It was therefore in German media studies (*Medienwissenschaften*), and
not in the artistic avant-garde, that this significant theoretical
advance was made, shifting media researchers' attention from media to
relations between media.

## Remediation, Central Concept in Intermediality's Mediatic Period

We have mentioned the original geographic dispersal of intermedial
studies as one explanation for the arduous, still-incomplete unification
of the field and its slow climb to recognition, but that was not the
only problem. The very term intermediality causes confusion. It is
marked, one might even say dated, by the historical circumstances under
which it arose. The combination of the prefix 'inter' and the stem
'media' initially attracted derision. Therefore intermedialists are
interested in what lies between that which is between: presumably, it
can't be much! While the premise is accurate -- intermedialists do
indeed attend to what is between the in-between -- the clearly false
conclusion illustrates the widespread initial distrust in academic
circles of a field that presented itself as an 'indiscipline'. It is
true, however, that the question of the 'in-between' and how it was
conceived by the intermedialists formed the basis for the emergence of
intermedial theory.

The scepticism about this focus on the in-between may have been due in
part to the confusion created by the prefix 'inter'. From the outset,
intermediality fit naturally enough into a quasi-chronological series of
terms that share its prefix: intertextuality, interdiscursivity,
interdisciplinarity, intersubjectivity. There was therefore a tendency
to situate it within a reassuring but largely false *telos.* But reading
intermediality in terms of the 'inter-' logic inherited from semiotics
and structuralism distorts its essence. That confusion was aggravated by
the juxtaposition of 'inter-' with 'media', which duplicated its
meaning. Some clarifications are in order here.

In a study of the concept of 'medium'[^30] -- that which is at the
center, in the middle - Jacques Rancière stresses the order of
precedence implicit in the 'inter-' principle. It may seem obvious but
Rancière underscores that for there to be an in-between, there must be
two terms -- two texts, two discourses, two disciplines, two subjects --
engaged in a mutual relationship in space, in time, in logic, in short
within a framework or system where an in-between can come between. The
French mathematician, philosopher and psychiatrist Daniel Sibony had
addressed the question several years earlier in *Entre-deux. L'origine
du partage*,[^31] an essay that may be considered a first attempt to
theorize the notion of the in-between (*l'entre-deux*), a category from
which intermediality is distinguished but with which it was and remains
associated.

Sibony situates the concept of the in-between as an extension and
transcendence of the poststructuralist idea of difference: 'Until now,
we have lived and thought under the sign of *difference'* but
'fast-moving facts and events ... mean we can no longer be content with
using difference as our reference point'.[^32] Sibony argues that while
the idea of difference is fundamentally valid, it is no longer adequate
to reality. Difference has lost its relevance and must therefore be
expanded to the in-between, an 'effective ... operator'[^33] that makes
it possible to grasp the complexity of the phenomena at work in the
in-between. Sibony calls those phenomena trials (*épreuves*), for the
in-between appears to him fraught with tensions and rifts.

> Perhaps the trials of the in-between come down to movements of varying
> degrees of richness in which *an identity attempts to piece itself
> back together again,* to resolve itself (while believing it is
> resolving with others), to stand up like a Harlequin costume in the
> circus of the world ... But beyond the piecing together that the
> in-between actualizes, it achieves full strength when, in its great
> burgeoning, it appears as an *origin* figure ... which assumes or
> implies something other than rehashing an immobile 'in-between'.[^34]

We should note here in passing the nostalgic dimension of the origin
figure (the lure of putting the pieces back together again), which also
tinges discourse surrounding media and, in many respects, the work of
researchers in the field. This nostalgia is doubly paradoxical. The
advent of talking pictures, which was widely celebrated as a triumph of
technology, only restored the original, pre-existing unity of sound and
image as it is experienced in daily life (without technological
mediation). Technology 'pieced together again' what it itself had rent
asunder, since it had initially been incapable of reproducing sound and
image synchronously. In short, and this is the second aspect of the
paradox, the progress of media means that in the future we will be
better off -- as we were before! We will return to this paradox later;
at this point, it should just be noted that the origin myth is not
unrelated to the myth of authenticity.

This idea of precedence, with its whiff of nostalgia, is precisely what
is problematic for intermedialists. In fact, it gave rise to the first
major epistemic break produced by intermediality and is what
distinguishes it from the other 'inter-' variants listed above. That
break relates to both the nature of the two poles that circumscribe the
in-between and their prior nature. While the 'medium' as defined by
Rancière is between, intermediality is interested in an in-between that
lies between other in-betweens. In this sense, the detractors' gibes
were quite on point. Yes, it's true, intermediality is interested in
what lies between that which is between, and that is actually a great
deal, immense, for there is nothing else: the two prior terms that bound
Sibony's in-between are themselves between. In short, we have a
between-two-betweens, and this is complicated by the fact that these
in-betweens are dynamic, alive and constantly changing. The
disappearance of the pre-existing, fixed poles that had been the
starting point not only has a destabilizing effect but ultimately
excludes any precedence and relegates the origin figure to mythology --
and with it the nostalgia for an (idealized) past we can seek to
recover.

The first intermedialists did not initially question precedence but --
and this was already a significant shift -- they reversed its elements,
as Jens Schröter noted in 2012[^35] in a retrospective discussion of the
development of intermedial thinking.

> \[W\]e have to recognize that it is not individual media that are
> primal and then move toward each other intermedially, but that it is
> intermediality that is primal and that the clearly separated
> 'monomedia' are the result of purposeful and institutionally caused
> blockades, incisions, and mechanisms of exclusion.[^36]

As can be seen, Schröter does not go so far as to question the origin
figure defended by Sibony, nor the existence of media. He is content to
invert the usual order -- which places the two poles first, and then the
in-between -- and cast media as the product rather than the source of
intermedial relations.

Before considering the reasons for abandoning the idea of precedence, we
will look briefly at those 'blockades, incisions, and mechanisms of
exclusion' that are at the heart of the intermedial dynamic and were the
focus of researchers' attention during intermedial theory's mediatic
period. Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin aptly summarize this period
with the punchy slogan 'a medium is that which remediates'.[^37] Their
book *Remediation: Understanding New Media*, published in 2000 some 15
years after the emergence of intermedial thinking, is a milestone in the
brief history of intermedial theory that models the intermedial dynamic
for the first time. It is also a pivotal work that takes stock of the
progress of intermediality from the late 20^th^ century to the dawn of
the 21^st^ and opens up new perspectives that are central to
contemporary intermedial thinking. Bolter and Grusin thus offer a rich
synthesis of mediatic intermediality while at the same time noting its
weaknesses and contradictions, heralding the next phase: postmediatic
intermediality.

Basing themselves on Marshall McLuhan's maxim, picked up by Kittler and
many others, that 'the "content" of any medium is always another
medium',[^38] Bolter and Grusin contend that

> \[A medium\] appropriates the techniques, forms and social
> significance of other media and attempts to rival or refashion them in
> the name of the real. A medium in our culture can never operate in
> isolation, because it must enter into relationships of respect and
> rivalry with other media.[^39]

The remediation principle, which definitively excludes the possibility
of monadic media, goes beyond the intuitions of the first
intermedialists in that, while remaining focused on the development of
media, Bolter and Grusin shun questions of precedence and origin. If a
medium is something that remediates, then there can have been no first
remediation. Lisa Gitelman encapsulates this disconcerting logic, which
runs counter to tradition and to the Sibony / Rancière school of
thought, in a phrase we have already quoted: a medium is 'always already
new'. While it does not question the reality of media -- on the
contrary, that is its basis - Bolter and Grusin's model understands
media as being in perpetual motion, perpetual remediation. Their
emphasis is based squarely on what a medium produces and what it is
produced by. In this sense, they substantiate Chiel Kattenbelt's
suggestion that intermediality is currently the most radical form of
performativity.

That being said, Bolter and Grusin's conception of media remains marked
by the in-between, the medium being located between an independent
reality and the representation conveyed by the medium, which we call the
representational paradigm. For example, according to Bolter and Grusin,
remediation operates 'in the name of the real'. This is a key point, for
the relationship to reality that Bolter and Grusin defend has profound
implications for various aspects of the intermedial dynamic. Ultimately,
it sustains the notion that the medium, which both results from and
produces remediation, remains a discretizable entity and its operation
is limited to carrying, transforming or producing data, which is what
Lars Elleström calls a 'media container'.

Bolter and Grusin's conceptual apparatus -- starting with the concept of
'immediacy', a quality they ascribe to some forms of mediation -- is
built on this paradigm. By their definition, immediacy exists when
mediation is imperceptible to the user, who may thus believe himself or
herself to be in the presence of something which, in fact, is only being
represented. Immediacy ties in with another concept, media
'transparency': the medium disappears, or to be more precise its devices
and mediation processes are concealed. Here, Bolter and Grusin buy into
the art of illusion, into a logic that returns us to mimesis and repeats
the traditional arguments on which the media industry has constructed
its marketing strategies for more than a century: the promise of
'fidelity' and 'high fidelity' (to what is unclear), touted by the music
recording industry in particular since the beginning of the 20^th^
century. The visual reproduction industry's claims to steady progress
hinge on the same illusionistic rationale. Bolter and Grusin's phrase
'in the name of the real' must be read in this light.

Though Bolter and Grusin remain deeply indebted to the mimetic model,
they clearly are well aware that there are other forms of mediation that
do not refer to a tangible, autonomous reality outside of, detached
from, prior to and independent of the mediation process. Alongside the
logic of immediacy, they develop the idea of 'hypermediacy'. But while
the former is clearly explained, the argument supporting the second is
laboured and incomplete, illustrating both its complexity and the
difficulty Bolter and Grusin have in articulating it.

The concept of hypermediacy evokes the 'hypermedia' described by Ted
Nelson in his famous 1965 article 'A File Structure for the Complex, the
Changing and the Indeterminate'.[^40] Nelson uses the term in
conjunction with 'hypertext', a word he also coined. He pointed to the
then-novel fact that the computer makes non-linear document management
possible by hyperlinking content. That capability endowed media with an
additional, vitally important dimension: they could now assume mutable
structures that changed shape with every reading. To illustrate the
point, Nelson cited the example of non-linear arrangements of film
recordings that make them browsable in multiple dimensions, rather than
the two dimensions of linear sequencing. Bolter and Grusin's
hypermediacy is governed by the same logic.

The manifestations of hypermediacy are more diverse than those of
immediacy and do not summon any external reality. To clarify this first
fundamental aspect of the concept, it might be compared with an abstract
painting, which in theory refers to nothing save itself and its own
make-up (unlike a figurative painting, which despite its weighty
artifice-creating apparatus, including perspective, produces an
impression of reality). But hypermediacy is more than that. The
hypermedial image Bolter and Grusin use to illustrate the idea is a page
from the World Wide Web (unaccompanied by sound, in their example) that
displays on the screen the system of hyperlinks described by Nelson. The
page consists of disparate elements -- letters, numbers, icons, photos,
images of all kinds, fixed and moving -- that share screen space within
a system of complex, constantly changing and shifting relationships.
Unlike the transparency effect which, as has been noted, works to
suppress the perception of mediation, the webpage offers the spectacle
of mediation at work. Against the immediacy-related principle of
transparency, there is the principle of *opacity*. While transparency
satisfies the user's need to experience the illusion of reality, opacity
appeals to the user's fascination with mediation processes and the
pleasure of seeing them in action.

> \[T\]he artist (or multimedia programmer or web designer) strives to
> make the viewer acknowledge the medium as a medium and to delight in
> that acknowledgement.[^41]

The webpage is a window that does not function as a metaphorical
threshold, like the screen in traditional cinema or television, which
once crossed admits the viewer into a reality beyond the screen. The
webpage is a window that opens only onto other windows, never onto a
three-dimensional reality that has or might have an independent
existence. Richard Lanham sums up the difference with a change of
preposition: *looking at* rather than *looking through.* Bolter and
Grusin put it this way:

> \[C\]ontemporary hypermediacy offers a heteregoneous space, in which
> representation is conceived of not as a window on to the world, but
> rather as 'windowed' itself -- with windows that open on to other
> representations or other media. The logic of hypermediacy multiplies
> the signs of mediation and in this way tries to reproduce the rich
> sensorium of human experience.[^42]

The last remark foreshadows the major debates that have dominated
intermedial theory since 2005, revolving around the gradual abandonment
of the concept of medium in favor of mediation. In some artistic
practices, such as the theater, this move has been paralleled by the
shift from the representational paradigm to the presentational paradigm.
These concepts are developed by Tracy C. Davis and Thomas Postlewait in
connection with theatricality, the representational paradigm being
governed by mimetic logic while the presentational paradigm obeys the
logic of performance, in which one does not represent reality, but is in
it.

Bolter and Grusin's essay marks the high point of this first period of
intermedial theory, which we have called the mediatic period, and also
reveals its limits, to which we shall now turn.

## Postmediatic Intermediality: Remediation and Beyond

According to Alexander R. Galloway, the author of *The Interface
Effect*, '\[t\]he remediation argument \[...\] is so full of holes that
it is probably best to toss it wholesale'.[^43] It is a harsh judgment
but not without foundation: the remediation model is in fact seriously
flawed, both in its theoretical underpinnings and its ability to account
for the tremendous diversity of media interactions, which only increases
as we refine our observational tools. It quickly became apparent that
remediation, as conceived of and presented by Bolter and Grusin,
describes only one type of interaction and cannot be considered a
general scientific model of intermediality, as its originators suggest.
In a recent essay on intermedial dynamics, Lars Elleström uses the more
cautious terms 'media transformation' and 'transfer of media
characteristics among media' to better reflect the diversity which, he
notes, is observable in analyses of both the development of media (the
diachronic axis) and their modes of coexistence (the synchronic
axis).[^44]

We do not share Galloway's view that the remediation model should simply
be jettisoned. However, given its limitations, it does need to be
enriched and made more complex, for Bolter and Grusin confined
themselves to a fairly summary description of the mechanisms in play.
Taking our cue from Elleström, we also need to situate the model within
a broader framework, where it coexists with other types of media
interactions that must also be described. In this chapter, we will
discuss this expansion of the remediation model and look at some other
types of interactions. But first, we will discuss some of the weaknesses
that have been cited in the model's foundations, particularly the vein
of essentialism and questions of origin and precedence.

### Limitations of the Remediation Model

Intermediality rejects essentialist attempts to ascribe stable,
irreducible properties to media. The essentializing temptation appears
to us to be a remnant and legacy of the old debate over the paragon that
has marked thinking about the arts since the Renaissance and led to
their differentiation and hierarchization. The impulse to identify and
classify the mediatic dynamics crystallized in media likely derives in
large part from this paragonic reflex, triggered by the fact that the
first great mediations of the electrical age appeared in the
ontology-obsessed 19^th^ and 20^th^ centuries and possessed, or laid
claim to, an artistic dimension.

We have outlined how intermediality deals with dynamics that consist of
simultaneous movements of convergence, fragmentation, opposition,
fusion, retreat and advance that may be slow or abrupt, predictable or
chaotic. In this constant churn, nothing is fixed or assured. As we have
noted, while the remediation model is quite useful for clarifying
certain intermedial exchanges, its originators' attachment to the
(essentialist) concept of medium, inherited from classic communication
theory, limits its effectiveness and coherence. How can we reconcile
their resolutely dynamic definition of media -- 'a medium is that which
remediates' -- with traditional definitions that regard a medium as an
identifiable, stable entity with relatively clear contours, that
construct it as an object?

The origin figure is a key element in the essentialist arsenal, serving
as sanction and performing a legitimating or delegitimating function, as
the case may be. It is true that Bolter and Grusin's remediation model
partially evades it by excluding any first remediation -- there was
therefore no original medium and their understanding of media is not
monistic -- but nevertheless their model remains attached, as we have
seen, to the idea of precedence, through both the logic of the
'in-between' and the primacy they assign to the reproductive function of
media, returning us to the general principle of mimesis in which
remediation's central concepts of transparency and immediacy are
grounded. Mimesis postulates the priority of reality to replica, the
intelligible to the sensory, the immaterial to the material. It rests on
the idea of a source or model, an idea as vague as it is problematic.
But in both the priority of nature which inspires a work of art, and in
that of past works which have influenced an artist, there is a common
thread: the premise of precedence is colored by nostalgia. Curiously,
the essentially electrical modern media technologies that proliferated
from the 1880s, propelling their users into an unknown but promising
future, also played on feelings of nostalgia and evoked, implicitly or
explicitly, a return to paradise lost, the place where all was clear,
pure and true. Leaving aside the religious dimension of this yearning,
we will concentrate on its corollary, the trust in progress that
permeates Bolter and Grusin's essay and has left its imprint on the
thinking of the pioneers of intermediality as well as the media
industry's discourse since the invention of electricity. The belief in
progress makes nostalgia bearable, just as it nurtures it.

This attachment to the idea of progress explains why the first great
intermedial investigations, extending up to the dawn of the millennium,
dealt almost exclusively with 'successful remediations', i.e. with
remediations that led to the creation of successful 'new' media (all
electrical or digital, save a few exceptions such as the stethoscope,
the gramophone and the first phonographs). Emblematic examples include
records, cinema, radio, television and video. This focus stemmed from a
Darwinian conception of the evolution of media. As the media industry's
discourse suggests, media evolve just as living organisms do; we may
therefore assume that they move from success to success in accordance
with universal rules. Every step forward brings us closer to the
absolute medium, the medium that will one day be capable of mediating
everything with full transparency. We have already pointed to the
fundamental paradox here: in the future, technology, including media
technology, will make us still better off, as we were before. The
absolute medium that will make this possible is the mythical black box,
to which we shall return.

The optimistic, linear vision of media evolution that runs through
Bolter and Grusin's essay and infuses the mediatic period of
intermediality, which clearly rests on an old, essentialist substratum,
is, however, contradicted by reality. Greater 'fidelity' to the 'source'
-- since media are replicating it with increasing accuracy -- has been
so vaunted by the media industry for more than a century because it
revives the promise of a direct and true relationship to the external
world. Here we clearly see the simplistic nature of the remediation
model. If the obsessive quest for increased transparency -- which often
goes by names such as fidelity, high fidelity, high definition,
ultra-high definition, stereo or surround sound -- really were the sole
driver of remediation, how can we explain the fact that low-resolution
mediations like web documentaries shot with cellphones and MP3 tracks
have not only survived, but continue to thrive? How are we to explain
the popularity of grainy shots in cinema in an age of evermore powerful
cameras?

While intermediality rejects essentialism, it also defies deterministic
thinking. Media transformations are not governed by a single,
predictable logic that is reducible to the idea of progress, as the
remediation model implies. Not every remediation process leads to the
emergence of a successful new medium. Remediation also creates losers,
failures, scraps, all that is not 'selected' by evolution. Attempts at
remediation can trigger unpredictable, chaotic reactions that do not
follow the straight path of progress. This less glamorous aspect of
remediation was largely ignored during the mediatic period of
intermediality. It was not until the 2000s that researchers undertook a
more thorough analysis of aborted remediation attempts and began
considering media that, unlike theater for example, did not survive
remediation(s) by cinema, radio or television, or survived in a weakened
state, losing influence and *mainstream* status. This essential aspect
of remediation, the survival of what Charles Acland has called 'residual
media',[^45] is entirely ignored by Bolter and Grusin. But the evidence
clearly suggests that cases of aborted remediation -- remediation that
does not yield a new medium -- are the rule, not the exception.

The essentialist temptation and the attachment to the idea of progress
are not the remediation model's only weaknesses. Though seductive, its
underlying tetrad -- immediacy / transparency, hypermediacy / opacity --
is also problematic. As we have noted, for Bolter and Grusin,
remediation operates 'in the name of the real', which is to say its goal
is to produce the greatest possible transparency or, to use their
terminology, to create the best possible immediacy effect (in rendering
the object of representation). This first pair of the tetrad is opposed
to the second -- hypermediacy /opacity -- within a simplistic, dualistic
system that is presented as self-evident, when in fact the opposition is
in no way preordained. To be sure, the tetradic structure is not really
new: it derives from great debates in art history dating from the end of
the 19^th^ century about the nature and function of art, and more
specifically the status of mimesis, a term of oft-noted polysemic
import: 'imitation, copy, tracing, transcription, translation,
execution, incarnation'.[^46] In an important essay entitled
*Transparence et opacité. Essai sur les fondements théoriques de l\'art
moderne*,[^47] the art historian Philippe Junod, drawing heavily on the
work of the German philosopher Konrad Fiedler (1841-1895), shows how the
development of the machine in the 19^th^ century paradoxically
contributed to 'a revalorization of manual labour',[^48] beginning with
the work of artists. Their previously little-studied *praxis* began
attracting the interest of analysts and of the artists themselves. The
act of creation, particularly painting, becomes a legitimate object of
study and

> the ferment that accompanies the testing of new techniques enters
> theoretical consciousness and leads to the foregrounding of the
> *opacity* of the materials.[^49]

Later, Junod argues that opacity is what makes it possible to 'preserve
the perceptibility of artifice'.[^50]

> The theme of the value of artifice as a specific characteristic of
> art, which was picked up by romanticism and passed on to symbolism and
> then Russian formalism, was present throughout the \[19^th^\] century
> and its development led to the theories of *theatricality* ...,
> litterarity ..., pictoriality ...[^51]

In other words, to specific forms of mediation and mediality. In his
demonstration, Junod aligns transparency with mimesis and opacity with
*poiesis.* While the first principle, says Junod, dominated artistic
practice for nearly two thousand years, the second is currently
displacing it and informs modern art, in which the work is independent
and functions autonomously, without transparency or referent, outside of
mimesis.

In Bolter and Grusin, Junod's equations

\begin{center}
transparency = mimesis, opacity = *poiesis *
\end{center}

are replaced by

\begin{center}
transparency = immediacy, opacity = hypermediacy.
\end{center}

These parallels should not surprise us; they betray the debt that the
creators of the remediation model owe to art history and aesthetics. Nor
is that influence new; it is evident in the first major works on
electrical media.

There are two possible charges against Bolter and Grusin: that they
hewed too closely to this model transplanted from another field, or not
closely enough. The idea of *poiesis,* inherited from Fiedler, is
dominated by the central principle of action and activity. Everything
happens in and through action; all flows from it. This eliminates any
precedence and, most importantly, makes performativity the basis of the
creative dynamic, for both creator and user. It is surprising that while
Bolter and Grusin note the existence of non-mimetic mediality,
particularly in their discussion of hypermediacy, they do not delve more
deeply into what is a vital dimension of intermediality. We shall return
to this point in Chapter 3.

In this specific case, Bolter and Grusin fail to apply the artistic
model strictly enough, but in others they would have done well to depart
from it. Junod himself enriches the model's complexity with, for
example, the concept of 'obscured transparency',[^52] which he uses to
account for works that proceed from mimetic logic but are ambiguous and
assume meaning only through the action of the spectator/user. What
Junod, and through him Fiedler, are stressing here is the sociomedial
side of all mediating practices, as much as their performative
dimension.

The absence of this consideration is acutely perceived in the passages
in which Bolter and Grusin attempt to articulate immediacy, transparency
and opacity. Either mediation is opaque, in which case there is no
immediacy, or it is imperceptible, in which case there *is* immediacy.
Aside from the fact that this is a simplistic alternative -- as the
category of 'obscured transparency' demonstrates, reality is more
complex - Bolter and Grusin fail to take into account the user's agency
and capacity to change and adapt. In her study of the spread of the
telephone in the US, Carolyn Marvin traces its transition from
curiosity, in the technology's 'magical moment', to part of everyday
life as people assimilated its protocols, from learning how to
manipulate the device to adopting a telephone voice.[^53] This
'naturalization' of the device cannot be analyzed by simply wielding
concepts of opacity and transparency for the simple reason that, at the
end of the day, the device remains. We come to notice it less, or not at
all, but this does not mean that it has become transparent, and that
evolution does not produce the effect of immediacy. We therefore need to
revisit the basic equations that correlate opacity with hypermediality
and transparency with immediacy, and enrich the model with new elements,
such as the 'obscured transparency' category we have mentioned,
inopacity, and so forth, to make it truly operational.

### Enriching the Remediation Model: Media Resistance, Demediation Opacification

We have seen the breakthroughs achieved by intermedial research up to
the mid-2000s, and looked at resistance to remediation and the media
residues left by remediation. This is fertile ground. Studies of sound
in theater and still more recently of magic shows are examples of the
new research paths that continue to improve our understanding of an
intermedial reality composed of interlacings, intersections,
'entanglements', retreats and accidents, which the necessarily linear
genealogy of media that inspired the first intermedialists could not
readily account for.

Sibony linked the in-between to the origin, but also regarded it as a
locus of trials, and it is true that remediating processes sometimes,
though not always, produce reactions of varying degrees of violence
governed by a general principle that we call 'media resistance', which
may be understood as an attempt at counter-remediation. This too is
entirely absent within the scope of Bolter and Grusin's analysis. Media
resistance is a defence mechanism triggered when the basic elements of
the mediating conjuncture are, or more precisely appear to be,
jeopardized by the intrusion of an exogenous element. The resistance
mechanism can have the effect of preventing, avoiding or delaying the
introduction of the new element, or even expelling it after it has made
an incursion, in which case we can speak of 'de-remediation' or simply
'demediation'. The decline in the use of fixed sound systems in some
theaters with the advent of talking pictures is a striking example.
Analyses of technical specs and prompt books show that 'technologically
reproduced sound', which had made a widely noted and welcomed entrance
to the theater stage, was gradually evicted from it. And the evidence
clearly suggests that this expulsion was not related solely to the
waning of its drawing power (as a curiosity or novelty).

To be sure, there is no essentialism at work here. When a 'medium'
resists an incursion by a new technology (which is generally what the
newcomer is), it is not behaving like a living organism secreting
antibodies to expel or destroy an intruder. The resistance is always of
a sociomedial nature: it arises in the community of men and women in
which the medium operates; it springs from values; it is tied to a
discourse, to representations. The microphone, which was long rejected
by the theater -- although today its use is becoming increasingly
common, so much so that it goes unnoticed -- was readily accepted on the
cabaret stage for use by singers. And yet, since the days of
Shakespeare, theater reviews had been complaining that it was hard to
hear the actors. They did not articulate clearly enough or did not speak
loudly enough; the audience was too noisy; or the sounds emanating from
the stage or the building were too loud; or the acoustics were lousy.
The arrival of sound systems could have solved those problems and
enhanced theatrical mediation. But the theater resisted. Meanwhile, the
cabaret halls put in sound systems and pulled in the crowds.

Media resistance is governed by a two-sided logic: it is a reaction to
remediation, i.e. to the tendency of any media practice, artistic or
not, to incorporate into its mediating action knowledge, techniques,
technologies, values, behaviours and protocols that are foreign to it,
and at the same time it checks the tendency of those elements to invade
an established media practice. It must be said, however, that much less
resistance is mounted against content than against production processes,
as the rich tradition of adaptation (of novels for the stage, of plays
for the movies, etc.) shows.

Media resistance also points to the fact that remediation doesn't only
happen between media, it can also strike elements -- again, often
technologies -- that are not attached to any specific medium, as was
seen during the 'great digital conversion' of the late 20^th^ century.
Nor is it a one-way process. What we can extract from this is that media
are not the only things that remediate or are remediated, and
remediation produces all manner of effects, including media resistance
and demediation (also illustrated, in a way, by the renewed popularity
of vinyl records and the preservation of 16 mm and 35 mm film).

One of those effects, a somewhat surprising one, relates to the question
of opacity. According to Bolter and Grusin, opacity exists when
mediation is perceptible to the user. But Bolter and Grusin never
consider the origins of opacity. Let us take the example of the use of
the microphone in the theater. For reasons we will discuss later, the
theater, like the opera, initially banned the mic from the stage, while
three major media practices -- records, radio and talking pictures (to
which we might add cabaret) -- developed and triumphed because of it.
The radio played a central role in this process. The radio microphone
truly revolutionized the art of public speaking, sparking an explosion
of vocal styles. With radio, says Jacob Smith, the audience discovered
that private speech and everyday conversation, could be elevated to the
level of public speech and reproduced as such (or at least so it was
perceived) on the radio in its infinite diversity, without exaggeration,
without the familiar stage effects, 'transparently'. It was the dawning
of the age of the crooner, the dulcet-toned singers who, instead of
making the back-row seats shudder, made hearts flutter. President-to-be
Franklin Delano Roosevelt saw the change and grasped the persuasive
power of the intimate new medium. He started his *fireside chats* In
1929, at the beginning of the Great Depression, and continued them until
1944, into his third term as president. In those radio addresses, he
talked to his fellow Americans about the great problems of the day in
conversational terms. Radio sounded true. And the audience could tell
the difference. The comparison with theater, another locus of public
speech, was inevitable. As a result, observes Smith, 'vocal conventions
of the histrionic stage were becoming all too audible as conventions to
many listeners'.[^54]

The new aurality created by radio brought out the artificiality of the
voice and diction of stage actors, which had always been based on
projection, volume and eloquence. Those fundamental qualities had been
so assimilated by users that they no longer noticed them. They had
become 'naturalized'. Until the end of the 19^th^ century, i.e. the
advent of sound reproduction technologies, a fine voice was necessarily
a powerful voice. The theater decided to stick with that. The contrast
with radio voices laid bare the incongruity of theatrical practices,
which used the pretext of 'truth', meaning unmediated, supposedly
'natural' relationships between actors and spectators, to celebrate an
unnatural way of speaking.

Understood in terms of the logic of remediation, this development made
opaque an aspect of mediation that had previously been naturalized (the
mediation having become partially or totally transparent). This process
is called 'opacification'. In our example, one medium, radio, rendered
the mediation effected by another, theater, opaque. Thus, contrary to
what Bolter and Grusin suggest, opacity does not spring solely from a
medium's bid to assert its identity or from a developmental dynamic, but
can arise from a conjuncture on which it may have no purchase. When
opacification is not produced by the medium itself, it is almost always
hostile to the medium and damages its image.

The mechanisms of media resistance, demediation and opacification do not
exhaust the possibilities for further development of the remediation
model, but the model's scope still remains limited, and it is clear
today that this product of an age obsessed with recycling -- industrial,
esthetic, cultural, philosophical -- cannot by itself account for the
complexity and diversity of the intermedial dynamic. Other types of
media interactions have been uncovered recently. In the following
section, we look at the concepts of hypermediality, convergence and
transmediality, which for the past 10 years have been at the center of
intermedial reflection.

### Hypermediality, Convergence and Transmediality: Other Models of Intermedial Dynamics

The concept of hypermediality emerged in the field of theater studies in
the mid-2000s. From the intermedial point of view, theater is, of
course, a medium. Indeed, it is the quintessential intermedial practice
insofar as it is itself made up of interacting media -- music, set
design, plastic arts, dance, gesture, the actor's performance, the
script, etc. -- just as a webpage is composed of interacting elements.
To put it in Bernd Herzogenrath's terms, theater is an '*intermedium',*
in Jens Schröter's terminology, it is a'*super medium'.* Chiel
Kattenbelt goes still further, arguing that theater is a hypermedium but
in a rather different sense than what Ted Nelson means by the term, as
the following passage makes clear:

> \[F\]ilm, television and digital video are technology-based media that
> can record and play back everything that is visible and audible,
> within their specific ranges of sensitivity, but they cannot
> incorporate other media without transforming them under the conditions
> of the specificity of their own mediality. At the very most, media can
> *remediate* (Bolter and Grusin 1999) other media, which implies in the
> end a refashioning. Clearly, theatre is not a medium in the way that
> film, television and digital video are media. However, although
> theatre cannot record in the same way as the other media, just as it
> can incorporate the other arts, so it can incorporate all media into
> its performance space. It is in this capacity that I regard theatre as
> a hypermedium.[^55]

A 'hypermedium' must therefore be understood as a federating medium, not
an assimilating or transformative one. It is an 'archi-medium' or
'medium of media', '*home to all*', an interart, a technological meeting
place 'where the art forms of theater, opera and dance meet, interact
and integrate with the media of cinema, television, video and the new
technologies'.[^56] This welcoming attitude is reflected in the
theater's singular treatment of other mediatic objects, technologies,
arts and media that enter into the process of theatrical creation or
performance. The concept of hypermediality clearly derives from Bolter
and Grusin's concept of hypermediacy, but it goes further. One
attractive feature is that it eliminates the question of representation
-- and the relationship to reality -- for, to return to Lanham's
'window' metaphor, it does not require us to choose between 'looking at'
and 'looking through'. Better still, it allows for both simultaneously,
which fits well with current theatrical practices and the performative,
experiential approach. The concept of hypermediality not only enables
Kattenbelt to underscore the singularity of theater compared with many
other media, but also advances intermedial theory by revealing the
existence of systems of mediatic and technological interactions that do
not fall within the purview of Bolter and Grusin's remediating logic and
do not partake in its cannibalistic violence.

In 2006, the same year that Chiel Kattenbelt developed the concept of
hypermediality, Henry Jenkins tackled a central notion in the genealogy
of media, one that underpins the concept of remediation: media
convergence. It is not a new idea; its famous first appearance was in
Wagner's call for a *Gesamtkunstwerk* -- a total artwork -- but it truly
and lastingly took hold with the spread of electrical media in the first
three decades of the 20^th^ century. The advent of talking pictures is
one of its most famous and memorable exempla, and also the most
compelling argument in favor of the existence of a convergence dynamic.
The talkies were in fact the result of the long-predicted 'convergence'
of sound and image reproduction technologies, which until then had
developed separately. Paradoxically, the forward-looking logic of
convergence that Jenkins attacks has a kinship with the nostalgic quest
for an imagined, pre-technological origin that has been shattered and
whose fragments, to use Sibony's image, must be pieced together again.
That convergence is supposedly driven by three main factors: continuous
progress in the relevant technologies; technological determinism, which
tends towards their fusion; and users' obsessive quest for absolute
transparency. The convergence principle, which is held to be operative
in all media dynamics, purportedly works 'in the name of the real', as
the series of industry slogans we have already listed -- fidelity, high
fidelity, stereo, high definition, 3D, ultra-high definition, and so
forth -- assert. The relentless drumbeat of these claims over the space
of more than a century constitutes a series of milestones -- since they
form a sequence -- on the triumphant road that will ultimately lead to
the absolute medium and perfectly transparent mediation, in Bolter and
Grusin's sense. 'Sooner or later, the argument goes, all media content
is going to flow through a single black box into our living rooms (or,
in the mobile scenario, through black boxes we carry around with us
everywhere we go)'.[^57] Media convergence, then, is posited as the
ultimate form of remediation, 'total remediation'.

Unlike Kattenbelt's hypermedia, which is federative and preserves the
mediality of each medium, the black box is integrative, mixing and
blending all that enters into it. The idea of convergence is so
widespread and so frequently invoked by the industry that it seems
natural and inevitable, but Jenkins demurs. In his view, technological
progress cannot be separated from the conjuncture in which it arose and
technological determinism is an illusion, a marketing ploy: 'convergence
refers to a process, not an endpoint'.[^58] Jenkins argues that
'\[p\]art of what makes the black box concept a fallacy is that it
reduces media change to technological change and strips aside the
cultural levels'.[^59] But '\[c\]onvergence does not occur through media
appliances, however sophisticated they may become. Convergence occurs
within the brains of individual consumers and through their social
interactions with others'.[^60]

One of Jenkins' great merits is that he has refocused intermedial
reflection on the key role of the user (he uses the word 'consumer') and
more generally on the ever-changing environment from which media emerge
and in which they operate. He thereby converts the traditional concept
of media convergence -- spontaneously understood as 'technological'
convergence -- into a theory of comprehensive convergence,

> where old and new media collide, where grassroots and corporate media
> intersect, where the power of the media producer and the power of the
> media consumer interact in unpredictable ways.[^61]

How then can we subscribe to any kind of teleology? The answer is
simple: the black box is a myth created out of whole cloth by the media
industry to justify planned obsolescence and its ever-faster product
replacement cycle. But the current participatory culture, which is tied
to the shift to performativity and embraces networking and collective
intelligence, has other demands: users do not want, if they ever did, a
'one-size-fits-all relationship to media content. Consumers want the
media they want, where they want it, when they want it and in whatever
format they want'.[^62] Media convergence supposedly led towards a
single super-medium, the black box; this new participatory culture,
which according to Jenkins is creating a 'convergence culture', leads in
the opposite direction, towards media divergence. To adapt to new user
behaviours, the industry needs to multiply its platforms, specialize
them for specific purposes, and find ways to circulate its media content
on them. This new dynamic set the stage for a decisive phase in
intermedial thinking: the birth of the concept of transmediality, which
illuminates intermedial relationships quite different from Bolter and
Grusin's remediation or Kattenbelt's hypermediality.

In the third chapter of his essay on the *Matrix phenomenon*, Jenkins
shows that even as the industry continued celebrating steady progress
towards the 'black box', it submitted to the logic of divergence by
creating 'transmedial' media content, i.e. content that can be adapted
to the various existing media technologies. *The Matrix* spawned three
feature films, a 90-minute television series, animated films, multiple
comic books, video games, etc.

Transmediality takes infinitely variegated forms, ranging from simply
distributing purportedly uniform content on different platforms, which
was the usual practice at the outset, to creating fragmented collective
intelligence, whose different parts are supported by different
technologies and the whole, like Paolo Soleri's arcology,[^63] cannot be
grasped from any vantage point.

In the first case, the objective is to adapt media content to different
medialities (or media) with the intention of preserving the content in
its entirety as far as possible. This conception of transmediality rests
on two major assumptions: that media content can exist independently of
mediation processes and, conversely, that those processes have no
content.

In the second case, the semantic content is broken up according to the
mediating qualities of the available platforms and the 'fragments' are
distributed across the platforms. Thus, to return to the *Matrix*
example*,* the user discovers new media content on each platform, since
each supports an aspect of *The Matrix* that corresponds to its specific
mediality. In practical terms, this means that no single user can master
the entirety of the media content; only the sum of users has that grasp,
and this relates to what is called collective intelligence.

There are some major issues here. Picking up on Jenkins' discussion,
Mark J.P. Wolf analyzes the impact of transmediality on traditional
distinctions between real and mediatized worlds.

> Transmediality implies a kind of independence of its object: the more
> media windows we experience a world through, the less reliant that
> world is on the peculiarities of any one medium for its existence.
> Thus, transmediality also suggests the potential for the continuance
> of a world in multiple instances and registers; and the more we see
> and hear of a transmedial world, the greater is the illusion of
> ontological weight that it has, and experiencing the world becomes
> more like the mediated experience of the Primary World.[^64]

While transmediality does not totally blur the dividing line between
what Wolf, referencing Tolkien, calls the primary world and the
mediatized world, it makes the distinction superfluous; from the point
of view of a transmedial logic in which user experience is paramount,
the question of representation becomes moot, as does the interplay
between immediacy and hypermediacy. As in the case of convergence, the
emphasis is on the user and the user experience, which is always real.
We have moved from the representational paradigm to the experiential
paradigm.

### Shattering the Medium: The Advent of Postmediatic Intermediality

Transmediality has had another notable impact on intermedial theory: it
challenges the very existence of media as they were conceived of by the
first intermedialists. In his definition of the medium, Véron did not
content himself with underlining the technological dimension; he made
technology the foundational element of a medium: 'a constellation
composed of a technology *PLUS* the social practices of production and
appropriation of that technology'. The 'double birth' model that André
Gaudreault and Philippe Marion extract from their observations on the
origins of cinema rests on this same principle of primacy. According to
Gaudreault and Marion, the double birth of a medium unfolds in three
phases: the appearance of a new technology (phase 1), the creation of a
device (phase 2), and the realization of the medium's expressive
autonomy and specificity, with all that this implies in terms of both
socialities and the medium's institutional dimension (phase 3). François
Odin describes the same process, calling the emerging technology a
'cryptomedium' (since it cannot yet be predicted that it will give birth
to a medium), phase 2 being the appearance of a 'protomedium', and phase
3 the appearance of the medium as such.

Transmediality doesn't just disrupt this chronology; it denies the
primacy of technology. Jenkins' critique of convergence culture, his
defence of media divergence, and all that this implies for transmedial
dynamics support the conclusion that a change in technology does not
produce a change in medium. This also has consequences for the origins
of media, as Jenkins makes clear:

> \[H\]istory teaches us that old media never die -- and they don't even
> necessarily fade away. What dies are simply the tools we use to access
> media content -- the 8-Track, the Beta tape.[^65]

Jenkins ends up drawing a clear distinction between the medium and what
he calls the 'delivery technology' for media content. 'Recorded sound is
the medium. Cds, MP3 files, and 8-track cassettes are delivery
technologies'.[^66]

Lars Elleström's work in recent years on multimodality moves in the same
direction. He divides a medium into three subcategories: the basic
medium, the qualified medium, to which artistic practices are attached,
and the technical medium, which corresponds to Jenkins' 'delivery
technologies'.

> Basic and qualified media are abstract categories that help us
> understand how media types are formed by very different sorts of
> qualities, whereas technical media are the very tangible devices
> needed to materialize instances of media types.[^67]

We can see at once the ontological and methodological issues presented
by this conceptual move and the concomitant risk of a reversion to an
essentialist vision of media. To date, a medium's identity has been
defined primarily by the material dimension of the mediation, but what
happens if an important element of the mediation -- Elleström's
technical medium or Jenkins' delivery technology -- is radically
changed? Will this lead to the end of the medium? That is precisely the
question at the center of Gaudreault and Marion's essay, *The End of
Cinema? A Medium in Crisis in the Digital Age*. They ask whether
'cinema, in its shift to the digital, has simply made a turn (in which
case we could speak of a digital turn) or whether it is in the process
of becoming something else - whether it is undergoing a true mutation
(in which case we could speak of a digital mutation)'.[^68] The latter
case will presumably need a new name. The authors quote, in passing,
Raymond Bellour to the effect that 'digital technology is not enough to
kill cinema. Although it may disturb it in many respects, it does not
touch its essence'[^69] and draw on the genealogy of cinema arguing that
the movies are not dying; it is just that 'a generation stands aside and
makes room for the next'[^70]

The genealogical argument is attractive. To the double birth model they
developed in 2000, the second birth being the institutionalization of
the medium, Gaudreault and Marion add a third birth, which is currently
in progress: 'an integrative and intermedial birth involving a degree of
return to porosity, to a hodgepodge, to hybridity, to crossfertilization
- all of which imbued the medium's very first birth'.[^71] By comparing
the current state of affairs with an older period in the history of the
medium, Gaudreault and Marion endow it with ontological legitimacy:
digital is mediatically acceptable since the change it produces echoes a
situation that is already inscribed in the history of the medium. They
accredit the rupture thesis defended by Jenkins and Elleström: even a
media practice as technologized as cinema can survive the most radical
technological transformations.

Current intermedial thinking, i.e. that of the postmediatic period, is
characterized by the erosion of belief in determinism and progress --
and particularly the death of the illusion of mediating exclusivity --
as much as it is by the shattering of the traditional conception of
media and the demise of technological primacy. The question of a
medium's identity has become secondary to its action and its position in
transmedial configurations. Not only do we now know that the set of
characteristics once used to define a medium is in fact unstable and in
constant flux, but we have also understood that no characteristic is the
exclusive property of any one medium and none, taken in isolation, is
decisive for the medium's survival, not even an array such as the
camera-projector-screen triad that appears so essential and basic.

The conclusion to which Gaudreault and Marion come doesn't just confirm
Jenkins and Elleström's hypothesis about delivery technologies, since
this applies to all components of media; it spells the end of the
traditional conception of a medium as summarized by Véron. Hence
Alexander R. Galloway's dictum: '**not media but mediation**'.[^72] For
Galloway, any attempt to find or impose a clear and stable definition of
media is not only vain, but a pipe dream we must shake off, along with
the technocentric thinking behind it. In a shift that reflects the
ascendancy of the performative perspective in the field of media
studies, mediation is now granted priority.

As Müller observes, intermedial thinking was born of a radical
rejection, a break with the understanding of a medium as a 'monad'
operating independently and analyzable in isolation. Proceeding from
Marshall McLuhan's idea that every medium includes another medium,
Müller and the first intermedialists showed that a medium is always in
interaction with other media. They called this interactive dynamic
'intermediality'. They soon came to the realization that intermediality
came first; it is intermediality that produces media. Revolutionary
though it was, this first period of intermedial thinking remained
focused on the concept of medium until the mid-2000s. Hence our label
'mediatic intermediality' for the first phase of intermedial thinking,
which spanned the 20-year period from 1985 to 2005.

The difficulty of defining what a medium is, and the basic technological
mutations that have made it impossible to confidently associate a medium
with a given technology or technologies, have led researchers in
intermediality to abandon the historical concept of medium in favor of
the idea of mediation, or what we call 'mediating conjunctures'. Thus,
over the past 10 years, we have gradually entered the postmediatic phase
of intermediality.


[^1]: Milad Doueihi, *Digital Cultures*, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
    University Press, 2011.

[^2]: Espen J. Aarseth, *Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature*,
    Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.

[^3]: Peter Boenish, 'Mediation Unfinished: Choreographing
    Intermediality in Contemporary Dance Performance', in
    *Intermediality in Theatre and Performance*, ed. by Freda Chapple
    and Chiel Kattenbelt, Amsterdam; New York: Rodopi, 2006, pp.
    151-66.

[^4]: Claus Clüver, 'Intermediality and Interarts Studies', in *Changing
    Borders: Contemporary Positions in Intermediality*, ed. by Jens
    Arvidson, Lund: Intermedia Studies Press, 2007, pp. 19-37; Water
    Moser, 'L'interartialité : pour une archéologie de
    l'intermédialité', in *Intermedialité et socialité: histoire et
    géographie d'un concept*, ed. by Marion Froger and Jürgen E and
    Müller, Münster: Nodus, 2007, pp. 69-92.

[^5]: J. David Bolter and Richard A Grusin, *Remediation: Understanding
    New Media*, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000. The title echoes the
    resounding essay published by Marshall MCLuhan, *Understanding
    Media*, New York: Signet, 1966.

[^6]: Carolyn Marvin, *When Old Technologies Were New: Thinking About
    Electric Communication in the Late Nineteenth Century*, Nachdr.,
    Ill, 1990.

[^7]: Philip Auslander, *Liveness: Performance in a Mediatized Culture*,
    London; New York: Routledge, 2011.

[^8]: Jonathan Sterne, *The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound
    Reproduction*, Durham \[N.C.: Duke university press, 2003.

[^9]: Lisa Gitelman, *Always Already New: Media, History, and the Data
    of Culture*, The MIT Press, 2008.


[^11]: Alexander R Galloway, *The Interface Effect*, Cambridge, UK;
    Malden, MA: Polity, 2012.

[^12]: Craig Dworkin, *No Medium*, 1st MIT Press paperback edition,
    Cambridge, Mass London: MIT Press, 2015.

[^13]: *What Is Media Archeology.*, ed. by Erkki Huhtamo and Jussi
    Parikka, Cambridge: Polity Press, 2015.

[^14]: Philippe Marion, *L'année des médias 1996,* 1997
    \<<https://dial.uclouvain.be/pr/boreal/object/boreal:83077>\>
    \[accessed 16 February 2019\].

[^15]: Jean-Louis Déotte, *Appareils et formes de la sensibilité*,
    L'Harmattan, 2005.

[^16]: Philippe Ortel, 'Note sur une esthétique de la vue : Photographie
    et littérature', 2002
    \<<https://doi.org/http://isidore.science/document/10.3406/roman.2002.1164>\>;
    Arnaud Rykner, *Le tableau vivant et la scène du corps : vision,
    pulsion, dispositif*, Hyper Article en Ligne - Sciences de l'Homme
    et de la Société, 2013
    \<<https://isidore.science/document/10670/1.0jcfgt>\> \[accessed 16
    February 2019\].

[^17]: Jacques Rancière, *Le spectateur émancipé*, La Fabrique éditions,
    2008.

[^18]: Daniel Sibony, *Entre-deux: l'origine en partage*, Paris:
    Editions du Seuil, 2003.

[^19]: Gilles Deleuze, *Cinéma*, Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 1983.

[^20]: For reasons to be explained later, we prefer the expression
    'mediating conjuncture' to 'media'. During intermediality's
    'mediatic period', media was the preferred term cf Éric Méchoulan,
    'Intermédialités : le temps des illusions perdues', *Intermédialités
    : Histoire et théorie des arts, des lettres et des techniques /
    Intermediality : History and Theory of the Arts, Literature and
    Technologies*, 1, 2003, 9-27
    \<<https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.7202/1005442ar>\>.

[^21]: We shall return to the question of sociomedialities in Chapter 4.

[^22]: Friedrich Kittler, *Optical Media*, trans. by Anthony Enns, 1
    edition, Cambridge: Polity, 2009.

[^23]: Frédéric Barbier and Catherine Bertho-Lavenir, *Histoire des
    médias: de Diderot à Internet*, Paris: Colin, 1996.

[^24]: Friedrich Kitler, quoted by Galloway, *The Interface Effect*, p.
    13.

[^25]: Barbier and Bertho-Lavenir, *Histoire des médias: de Diderot à
    Internet*, p. 5, our translation.

[^26]: Eliséo Véron, 'De l'image sémiologique aux discursitivtés. Le
    temps d'une photo', *Hermès*, 13, 1994, 45 (p. 51)
    \<<https://doi.org/10.4267/2042/15515>\>, our translation.

[^27]: Gitelman, *Always Already New: Media, History, and the Data of
    Culture*, p. 7.

[^28]: Jürgen Müller, *Intermedialität: Formen Moderner Kultureller
    Kommunikation*, Münster: Nodus Publikationen, 1996.

[^29]: Müller, *Intermedialität: Formen Moderner Kultureller
    Kommunikation*, p. 70.

[^30]: Jacques Rancière, 'Ce que « medium » peut vouloir dire :
    l'exemple de la photographie', *Appareil*, 1, 2008
    \<<https://doi.org/10.4000/appareil.135>\>.

[^31]: Sibony, *Entre-deux: l'origine en partage*.

[^32]: Sibony, *Entre-deux: l'origine en partage*, p. 9.

[^33]: Sibony, *Entre-deux: l'origine en partage*, p. 12.

[^34]: Sibony, *Entre-deux: l'origine en partage*, pp. 15-16.

[^35]: *Travels in Intermedia\[lity\]: Reblurring the Boundaries*, ed.
    by Bernd Herzogenrath, Interfaces: Studies in Visual Culture, 1st
    \[ed.\], Hanover: Dartmouth College Press, 2012.

[^36]: Herzogenrath, *Travels in Intermedia\[lity\]: Reblurring the
    Boundaries*, p. 30.

[^37]: Bolter and Grusin, *Remediation: Understanding New Media*, p. 65.

[^38]: MCLuhan, *Understanding Media*, p. 23.

[^39]: Bolter and Grusin, *Remediation: Understanding New Media*, p. 65.

[^40]: T. H. Nelson, 'Complex Information Processing: A File Structure
    for the Complex, the Changing and the Indeterminate', in
    *Proceedings of the 1965 20th National Conference*, ACM '65, New
    York, NY, USA: ACM, 1965, pp. 84-100
    \<<https://doi.org/10.1145/800197.806036>\>.

[^41]: Bolter and Grusin, *Remediation: Understanding New Media*, pp.
    41-42.

[^42]: Bolter and Grusin, *Remediation: Understanding New Media*, p. 34.

[^43]: Galloway, *The Interface Effect*, p. 20.

[^44]: Lars Elleström, *Media Transformation: The Transfer of Media
    Characteristics Among Media*, Houndsmill, Basingstoke, Hampshire New
    York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.

[^45]: Charles R Acland, *Residual Media*, Minneapolis: University of
    Minnesota Press, 2007.

[^46]: Philippe Junod, *Transparence et opacité: Essai sur les
    fondements théoriques de l'art moderne. Pour une nouvelle lecture de
    Konrad Fiedler*, Nîmes: Chambon, 2004, pp. 11-12, our translation

[^47]: Junod, *Transparence et opacité: Essai sur les fondements
    théoriques de l'art moderne. Pour une nouvelle lecture de Konrad
    Fiedler*.

[^48]: Junod, *Transparence et opacité: Essai sur les fondements
    théoriques de l'art moderne. Pour une nouvelle lecture de Konrad
    Fiedler*, p. 293.

[^49]: Junod, *Transparence et opacité: Essai sur les fondements
    théoriques de l'art moderne. Pour une nouvelle lecture de Konrad
    Fiedler*, pp. 309-10.

[^50]: Junod, *Transparence et opacité: Essai sur les fondements
    théoriques de l'art moderne. Pour une nouvelle lecture de Konrad
    Fiedler*, p. 393.

[^51]: Junod, *Transparence et opacité: Essai sur les fondements
    théoriques de l'art moderne. Pour une nouvelle lecture de Konrad
    Fiedler*, pp. 310-11.

[^52]: Junod, *Transparence et opacité: Essai sur les fondements
    théoriques de l'art moderne. Pour une nouvelle lecture de Konrad
    Fiedler*, p. 387.

[^53]: Marvin, *When Old Technologies Were New: Thinking About Electric
    Communication in the Late Nineteenth Century*, pp. 63-108.

[^54]: Jacob Smith and American Council of Learned Societies, *Vocal
    Tracks: Performance and Sound Media*, Berkeley: University of
    California Press, 2008, p. 94
    \<<https://login.gbcprx01.georgebrown.ca/login?url=https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/georgebrown-ebooks/detail.action?docID=358943>\>
    \[accessed 16 February 2019\].

[^55]: Chiel Kattenbelt, 'Theatre as the Art of the Performer and the
    Stage of Intermediality', in *Intermediality in Theatre and
    Performance*, ed. by Freda Chapple and Chiel Kattenbelt, Amsterdam;
    New York: Rodopi, 2006, p 37.

[^56]: Freda Chapple and others, *Intermediality in Theatre and
    Performance*, Amsterdam; New York: Rodopi, 2006, p 24.

[^57]: Henry Jenkins, *Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media
    Collide*, Revised edition, New York: NYU Press, 2008, p. 14.

[^58]: Jenkins, *Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide*,
    p. 16.

[^59]: Jenkins, *Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide*,
    p. 15.

[^60]: Jenkins, *Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide*,
    p. 3.

[^61]: Jenkins, *Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide*,
    p. 2.

[^62]: Jenkins, *Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide*.

[^63]: Paolo Soleri, *Arcologie: la ville à l'image de l'homme*,
    Roquevaire: Parenthèses, 1980.

[^64]: Mark J. P Wolf, *Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and
    History of Subcreation*, New York: Routledge, New York, 2012, p.
    247.

[^65]: Jenkins, *Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide*,
    p. 13.

[^66]: Jenkins, *Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide*,
    p. 13.

[^67]: Lars Elleström, *Media Borders, Multimodality and
    Intermediality*, Basingstoke \[u.a.: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010, p.
    12.

[^68]: André Gaudreault and Philippe Marion, *The End of Cinema? A
    Medium in Crisis in the Digital Age*, New York: Columbia University
    Press, 2015, p. 6.

[^69]: Raymond Bellour, *La querelle des dispositifs. Cinéma,
    installations, expositions*, coll. « Trafic », Paris, P.O.L., 2012,
    p. 16 quoted by Gaudreault and Marion, *The End of Cinema? A Medium
    in Crisis in the Digital Age*, p. 249.

[^70]: Gaudreault and Marion, *The End of Cinema? A Medium in Crisis in
    the Digital Age*, p. 183.

[^71]: Gaudreault and Marion, *The End of Cinema? A Medium in Crisis in
    the Digital Age*, p. 123.

[^72]: Galloway, *The Interface Effect*, p. 36.
