# Mediating Conjunctures

## Between Multiplicity and Identification

The idea of mediating conjunctures began with an observation: the terms
used in the field of media studies are problematic because either they
relate to an essentialized vision of mediation phenomena, or else they
are vague in that they have no operational value. In the previous
chapter, we defined the difficulties created by notions of *support*,
interface and device. And yet the most problematic notion is the term
'medium' itself.

We have shown that this term is tied to the intermedial phase that we
have named 'mediatic'. This notion, as well as its associated terms,
falls under an essentialist vision of mediation phenomena. This is why,
based on the postmediatic phase, researchers such as Galloway propose
that we simply abandon the concept of medium and concentrate on
mediation. We are likewise convinced of this necessity, but we believe
that we should also specify what the mediation process refers to.

One of the founding hypotheses of this book is to think that there is no
initial element that will thereafter be 'mediated': there is nothing
that comes before mediation. Bolter and Grusin apply the same principle:
there is nothing prior to the act of mediation. This initial aspect of
mediation implies that we cannot think the real as a layering of
mediations.

But this approach has a limit, as it provides a definition of mediation
that is simultaneously too vague and too particular. Too vague because
it ignores both the production methods relating to the mediating
operation and the moment that it is produced; too precise because it
presupposes that there would only be one operation, implying that it is,
generally, a singular process: we refer to mediation and not mediations.
And yet, if we were to concentrate on what is produced at the time of
each action, what occurs appears a little more complex. There is no
mediator; there is instead an ensemble of elements in play at the time
of the action and these elements (forces, human and non-human agents,
contextual aspects...) intersect, merge, oppose, meet and double in a
continual movement. It is this desire to move away from mediation as an
objectifiable and singular process that leads us to resist the idea of
'medium' that refers to prefabricated mediation forms that are already
structured and identifiable.

In the instant of the action, if we observe the interplay of these
elements, we can identify particular conjunctures. These conjunctures
are moving combinations that form the elements in play at the time of
the action. This is what we call 'mediating conjunctures'.

The notion of mediating conjunctures allows us to find a median path
between essentialism and non-essentialism, and therefore to not reduce
mediatic practices to defined and pre-defined units, but to otherwise
consider them as moving dynamics, without abandoning the possibility of
identifying the specific characteristics of these practices. In
completing Galloway's definition by which there is no media, but only
mediation, we can say that, in reality, there is no mediation that is
singular and identifiable, but mediating conjunctures.

Mediating conjunctures are necessarily plural. They are the moving
contexts – and thereby irreducible to *one* context – of action, the
dynamic configurations that an ensemble of interplaying forces and
agents in a determined space adopt at the moment of action. These
mediating conjunctures are what make the action possible, but they are
at the same time what produce it. This paradox warrants clarification:
on the one hand, mediating conjunctures are the environment where the
action takes place, they are what in part condition and shape it; on the
other hand, they can only be formed because the mediating dynamic has
already been set off.

The concept of stigmergy, that we borrow from Ollivier Dyens,[^1]
appears particularly useful for explaining this singular logic.
Originating in the field of biology, stigmergy describes a form of
self-organization. It is based on a simple principle: that a trace left
by an action in a given environment stimulates the completion of a
subsequent action in the same environment, regardless of whether this
new action is accomplished by the same agent or a different agent. The
movement of schooling fish offers a good example of stigmergy. The
school's shape is the outcome of all of the fish's movement but, at the
same time, it is also the cause: each fish's movement is determined by
the shape of the school. In other terms, the notion of stigmergy allows
us to think about the premediated aspect of each action and its
performative dimension. If we could take into account the ensemble of
perspectives from which the school of fish is observable, we would have
an exhaustive account of mediating conjunctures present in one precise
moment. This is, however, practically impossible and we must, as often
as possible, concentrate on the most precise elements. For example, we
could disregard everything surrounding the schooling fish and limit
ourselves to trying to understand the mediating conjunctures that are
related to its internal dynamics. But we could also widen our point of
view and identify another mediating conjuncture that would include, for
example, a shark in the vicinity of the school, whose action would
obviously influence the shape of the school and the behaviour of the
fish. We could also observe the ensemble of dynamics in play in the sea
or land area, or even concentrate on the simple interaction between the
fish involved in the school. It is clear that these possibilities are
infinite and that each is legitimate: it is therefore the plurality of
these points of view that determines the plurality of mediating
conjunctures. One particular mediating conjuncture is a discursive
abstraction, made as a result of one particular perspective.

The notion of mediating conjunctures allows us to avoid the pitfall of
conceiving of mediation as an exclusively homogenous device determining,
structuring and producing the action. In other terms, the idea of
mediating conjunctures allows us to resolve criticisms regarding notions
of *support*, interface and device, as covered in the second chapter. We
develop the concept of mediating conjunctures because the word
'mediation' suggests the existence of a single mediating element,
structured and defined that – as the combustion engine described by
Bachimont – would transform space into time, completely determining
every event produced within the frame of the mediation. As in the case
described by Matteo Treleani,[^2] who asserts that a user before a web
document is as an automaton, that is to say that in a nearly mechanic
way he performs actions that are measured by the mediating device: one
click on a link, then another, and one sees a series of actions framed
by a mechanic and algorithmic procedure. The idea of mediating
conjunctures is, on the contrary, based on the conviction that what
mediates does not exist before mediation. There is no prefabricated tool
which, all of a sudden, mediates the actions by shaping them: the
mediating contexts arise at the same moment as the action, and they are
multiple and moving, and this is why we can understand them as operating
at the conjunctures of many elements.

Thus understood in their multiplicity, mediating conjunctures cannot be
associated with an essence. Trying to grasp and characterize them in a
stable and fixed manner can only occur at the risk of disregarding the
movement by discretizing its continuity. Therefore, we can select a
determined time interval – a second, a minute, an hour, but also a
period – and try to identify the characteristics of a mediating
conjuncture during this time interval. Alternatively, as in the
schooling fish example, we can turn our gaze to a determined part of the
space. But this part will never be motionless, as it is our gaze that
disregards the changes by behaving as though certain characteristics of
the mediating conjunctures remain more or less the same during this time
interval.

We will return to the example of theatrical action to which we have
already alluded. When we refer to 'theatrical' action, we use the
adjective in order to refer to a particular mediation that shapes and
contextualizes the action. The epithet 'theatrical' refers to a
mediating conjuncture that has been identified, grasped and described.
This is only possible because we have limited our gaze to one
predetermined part of time and space: we have disregarded other shifting
mediating conjunctures in order to concentrate on one point of view and
to isolate an ensemble of factors, the forces and the agents that we
gather under the term 'theatrical'. This mediating conjuncture ends up
crystallizing and making way for a particular medium: theater. The
notion of mediating conjunctures helps us to understand that this is an
essentialization that thereby consists in naming this activity
'theatrical' according to the needs of language. But this does not
correspond to the real state of things. In other terms, the adjective
'theatrical' is a word that serves to identify a complex and shifting
combination of elements that form the particular context for an action,
at the same moment that it is produced. This context cannot be a closed
and stable device that remains unchanged for all 'theatrical' actions,
be it present actions or passed actions.

In this sense, the difference between a theatrical action and a film
action or a reading action, or even a love action, is only a difference
of degree and not of nature. It is, in other words, a difference that
can be situated on a continuous spectrum: the different mediating
conjunctures are not divided and separated in a discrete manner. For
example, a theatrical action in the context of a contemporary play is
closer to a dance performance of the same period than a Molière play.
This perspective simultaneously allows us to take into account the
premediation that exists within each media practice without
essentializing it. This is at the heart of the notion of mediating
conjunctures.[^3]

Let us return to the example of theatrical action in order to explain
this point of view. If we imagine an actress, she is on stage, playing
the role of Phaedra. She speaks, she crosses the space, she looks, she
moves her hands, her body. There is something in the process of being
produced in the same instant that the actress acts: it is an action.
When the actress is in the process of doing something, her action is
what counts the most, the most important thing. The fact that this
action takes place in a theater, on a stage, is one of the aspects of
this action, but it is not the only one and, above all, it cannot be
separated from all the other aspects involved in the action. And yet we
have said that it is a 'theatrical' action, as this action is
characterized by a context, an art and a series of forces in play at the
moment that it is produced. There is a stage, a space in which the
action must take place. There is then a theater: a spatial device that
includes the stage and allows an audience to observe it. There is also a
text – Phaedra's replicas – that the actress has learnt and is in the
process of performing. There are a series of rehearsals during which the
actress has practiced her role and perfected it. There is also a certain
light, a certain temperature, the actress's physical condition, a
particular audience, a sound at the end of the room, a particular and
changing 'atmosphere'. As an ensemble, these elements cross one another
in creating particular conjunctures. To identify some of these elements
in play is evidently an abstraction: it is impossible to demarcate in a
predictable manner the perimeters of observation. For example: we can
take into consideration the health conditions of the actress and tie
them to a history of her illnesses since childhood – or place them in a
genealogical lineage; we could do the same thing for the spectators;
we could take into account the weather conditions and situate them in an
ensemble of atmospheric phenomena... and yet each action, theatrical or
not, is produced within the context of a particular ensemble of
mediating conjunctures. In the case of a 'theatrical' action, we find a
certain number of recurring elements that are more present than others:
the stage, the theater, the audience, the text, the rehearsals... These
interrelated elements contextualize the particular type of action that
we consider theatrical. From there we could isolate these elements and
say that they are a form of mediation or, even further, that they
constitute one defined media: the theater. The theater would be a medium
as it corresponds to a more or less stable ensemble of – seeing as this
varies – mediating conjunctures. Obviously, this formulation is
justified and can be very useful. When we buy a ticket to go to the
theater, or when we talk about the play *Phaedra* that we saw the
evening prior, the reality of being able to say that it was in fact the
theater is crucial. But this gesture involves isolating a certain number
of elements that constitute a mediating conjuncture, and naming it is
always an arbitrary gesture. Let us say, for example, that the actress
in question performs on the street, doing without the theater building
and the traditional stage, and a group of people stop to listen to her.
Could we say that this is not theater? And if we say that she does not
speak in French, but in Italian, thus distancing herself from Racine's
text, or even that she improvises a text that speaks of Phaedra but has
nothing to with the known texts, would we say that this is not theater?

We will later return to these questions, but we outline, for now, that
mediating conjunctures are never stable, and they never occur in exactly
the same way; they are always moving, always changing. This does not
prevent us from trying, for sake of analysis, to recognize elements in
the movement of mediating conjunctures in order to bring together a
certain number of actions, by characterizing them as being part of the
same type. The fact that mediating conjunctures are not graspable in
discrete units also depends on another factor that which we have just
described with the help of the stigmergy concept. The action that is
produced in the mediating conjunctures is also a part of mediating
conjunctures, as it is one of the elements in play during their
constitution. The actress that plays Phaedra participates, by her
action, in the mediating conjunctures within which she is placed. This
is precisely what the notion of stigmergy implies: the movement and the
behaviour of each animal contribute to the production of a dynamic
spatial structure – the school of fish or the ant hive or the spider's
web, but this spatial structure itself conditions the behaviour of
the animals. There is no 'school' without the movement of each fish, and
yet the movement of a fish or of a particular bird is initiated by the
structure of the school. It is obviously the movement of the spider that
determines the structure of the web, but at the same time the webs
architecture determines the movement. The two occur together because one
forms part of the other. The action that is produced in the mediating
conjuncture is at the same time conditioned by its mediating conjuncture
– as the latter is its context – but, in turn, it conditions and
shapes the mediating conjuncture. Without the actress who acts, the
mediating conjunctures would be different.

Another example could help to understand this complex relationship
between mediating conjunctures and action. We are, at this very moment,
in the process of writing. Our writing action is produced at the
crossroads of a series of forces in play at this very moment. There is a
room with a particular lighting. There is a computer – an entire series
of organized techniques and technologies, a tradition of writing, a play
with letters, a keyboard, a word processor with its complex history and
its relationships with other older word processors, a typewriter,
handwriting. There is our ability to write: the fact that we have learnt
a writing technique – first by hand, then we were able to adapt this
technique to a machine and eventually to a computer, to different word
processors, to different keyboards, to different writing situations and
finally to this particular writing situation that is occurring at this
very moment. There is a language, English. There is a body of work that
had been done prior to writing and that gave us ideas. There is the
desire to write, at this very moment, and the possibility of doing so.
All these elements are in place and they are the forces currently in
effect, in this precise instant when we are in the process of writing.
The history of writing or the history of our work to prepare this text
has meaning only because they have produced a force that is in action at
this very moment. And yet the fact that we are in the process of writing
is, itself, a force in play. The fact that we write forms part of the
mediating conjunctures that characterize this very instant. The proof
lies in the fact that what we write, the way we write, our movements on
the keyboard, but also the letters that we choose, the words that form,
all condition what follows. In other terms, our writing action is part
of a context in which this writing action is produced. Our writing
action produces the context that thereby renders it possible and shapes
it.

## The Dimensions of Mediating Conjunctures

Let us now try to analyze mediating conjunctures to provide an
interpretation of their various elements. We can analyze these elements
on the basis of three coexisting and complementary dimensions: a
technical dimension, a discursive dimension and a practical dimension.
The merging of these three dimensions is what we have described using
the stigmergy dynamic. The ensemble of these dimensions characterizes
all the moving forces that come into play in mediating conjunctures.

1.  Each action falls within a particular technical context. Therefore,
    the actress who acts forms part of a heterogenous ensemble made up
    of techniques ranging from architectural approaches to the theater's
    construction, to sound devices, to acting, etc. A user who creates a
    Facebook profile acts within a technical context characterized by
    information protocols, machines, algorithms, ergonomics... As
    outlined, it is impossible to demarcate this context in a single
    way. There is a not *one* theatrical technique, given that the
    ensemble of technical approaches in play in each context is very
    heterogenous. Therefore, we refer to technology in order to make
    reference to this heterogenous assemblage that refers to the
    competencies and tools that, given their complex history, can hardly
    be considered a homogenous whole. We can say that this heterogenous
    ensemble of techniques creates a space in which the action then
    takes place, and we can thereby tie this technical dimension of
    mediating conjunctures to the spatial aspect determining the actions
    analyzed in the previous chapter. We will return to the examples of
    theatrical actions and writing actions in order to better understand
    what we call the technical dimension of mediating conjunctures. In
    the moment that she acts, the actress finds herself in a particular
    space. This space is the ensemble of relationships tying the stage
    to the audience – the orientation of seats, the height of the stage
    in relation to the auditorium, the placement of the theater wings
    –, but that also tie the different objects on stage to one another
    – the scenography, the position of other actors –, and that tie
    together the ensemble of the 'theater' structure with its external
    factors – the theater's location, for example. The actress's
    action, her acting, only has meaning because it takes place in a
    particular spatial context: she is on the stage, there is an
    audience watching her, she finds herself in a theater, this theater
    is in the center of, say, Montreal, or even in the suburbs of New
    York. And yet this space is not simply the ensemble of elements and
    forces present but, moreover, as we have said, the ensemble of
    relations that bind them together. This is why this space can be
    considered the technical dimension of mediating conjunctures;
    elements such as lighting or acoustics are part of the spatial
    context. The relationship between the actors and the audience is not
    defined simply by the distance or geometrical position of the stage
    in relation to the auditorium and the theater boxes, but also by the
    fact that a particular lighting device enables the stage to be seen
    by the spectators, and the sounds produced to be heard. All of the
    technical and technological devices in place form part of the
    spatial context that produces them. If there is a microphone, or a
    video recorder, or a computer that connects another theater via
    videoconference, these apparatus also form part of the spatial
    context because they contribute to building relationships between
    objects.

2.  The technical dimension is necessarily accompanied by a discursive
    – or cultural – dimension, without which the other would not make
    sense. This is what we have demonstrated in our discussion on
    sociomedialities. It is not, as we henceforth highlight, an abstract
    or immaterial aspect of mediating conjunctures. The discursive
    dimension is made up of the ensemble of documents, texts, or other
    forms of traces on which our interpretation of the world is
    based.[^4] These diverse documents, traditions and traces give way
    to a series of interpretative tendencies that shape the action at
    any given moment. The actress acts because there is a text -- in our
    example Racine's text. She also acts because there is a tradition
    wherein the theater means something for a group of people or a
    society. There are texts that have been studied and transmitted, a
    learning that occurs at school – or elsewhere –, a familiarity
    with the device that is possible thanks only to the sharing of
    communal textual or informational references. The ensemble of these
    references is shared by the audience – each member of the public in
    their own way –, by the actors, by the director. And these
    references are also shifting, as they do not cease to change and
    produce the context for the action. If we study these forces, we can
    identify particular tendencies that characterize a given moment, or
    a period, or a society. We could, for example, argue that a period
    is characterized by the strong importance of the concept of
    representation. Or again a certain culture is founded on a
    particular idea of the world's hierarchy. To identify this is, of
    course, a discretization, as these forces are in movement.
    Identifying a symbolic tendency is taking into account a norm at the
    center of a dynamic and changing landscape. The coincidence of a
    series of symbolic tendencies gives way to conjunctures that can be
    identified as given forms of mediation: for example, the theater.
    But in this instance, also, identifying this is an abstraction, a
    necessity of language – as we will see in more detail in the next
    chapter. Discursive aspects are fundamental in understanding
    mediating conjunctures also because they are not necessarily in
    harmony with technical features. Industry discourse relating to
    high-fidelity sound and image reproduction technology is an example.
    To understand the specificity of digital sound we must, on the one
    hand, understand technical sampling and discretization of analogue
    sound and, on the other hand, understand industrial discourse that
    – as opposed to technical realities – presents this sampling as a
    faithful representation of the continued realities of sound. CDs
    are, at the same time, a reproducing technique that reduces
    'fidelity' to the reality of sound, but also a cultural object that,
    according to this industry's discourse, results in higher fidelity.
    This paradox is unsurprising given the complex and shifting
    multiplicity of mediating conjunctures. It is precisely what Éric
    Méchoulan proposes when he defines intermediality as a hermeneutics
    of *supports*: 'with intermediality, we are not interested in the
    hidden meanings beyond the text, but in the operations that unite
    matter, forms, social usage, scholarly practices, the historicity of
    phenomena and authorizing institutions'.[^5] In this sense, the
    *support* is no longer a stable premediating technique, but a
    dynamic produced by the interlacing forces put in play in a
    particular moment.

3.  Lastly, we must underline the practical dimension of mediating
    conjunctures, which refers to the fact that actions taking place
    form part of these conjunctures and structure them. The action is
    made possible by the context wherein it is produced but, at the same
    time, it is precisely what puts it in place. If the actress's role
    had not existed, there would not have been, in this precise case, a
    play, there would not have been a stage, there would not even have
    been lighting, or a microphone. And, more generally, without acting,
    there would have been neither a theater nor theatrical devices. In
    the same way, if there had been no users that created their Facebook
    profile, there would be no Facebook. We will later return to this
    fundamental aspect.

Let us illustrate the coexistence of these three dimensions with the
help of an example, that of digital photography. We could argue that
digital photography is a separate *medium* that emerges as a result of
the development of preceding *media*, while obviously remaining separate
from these phenomena. Indeed, it is a particular technique that puts in
place specific conditions that can thereby be described by a series of
essential and defining features. But separating digital photography from
preceding *media* is not commensurate with actual practices. We could
say that digital techniques allow us to immediately capture a particular
moment, without the need of posing subjects, in at once obtaining the
photographic result of the photo – which does not need to be printed in
a laboratory. But we could also consider things differently by trying to
capture the mediating conjunctures that constitute the photographic
moment (the moment wherein one triggers the shutter open). We will see
that a series of ideas, of tendencies, of conditions constitute the
elements put into play which trigger the shutter open. These tendencies
are not specific to digital photography: what brings about a digital
photo is the conjuncture of these tendencies that converge when the
camera 'clicks'. In particular, the idea of having subjects that are not
posing. This idea is already present in photography prior to the
digital. From the 1930s, we have in fact begun to take portraits of
ordinary situations, without staging the photographic subjects. In
family albums, we can notice that the portraits, where everybody is
positioned and posing for the photograph, have been replaced with more
'natural' photos. In the field of artistic photography, we could
reference Doisneau and his 'stolen moments'. But this tendency existed
even before the photo: let us think, for example, of Caravaggio's
portraits. *Saint Matthew*, for example, with his dirty foot pointed
towards the viewer, is a painting profoundly marked by this tendency.

As for the rapid acquisition of the final product – the digital photo
does not need to be developed and printed –, we notice that this
tendency is identifiable prior to digital photography: in 1948, for
example, the Polaroid appeared. But also, before the Polaroid, one
described the skill of a painter by pointing out their speed, and their
ability to capture a moment – such as the impressionists. To these, we
add a particular technique, that of the *camera obscura* which, if it
was undeniably at the center of photographic development, also
characterized painting, at lease from the Venetian Veduta. Instead of
identifying digital photography as a separate medium, we could therefore
concentrate on the practice of taking a photo – the very moment that
the photo is taken – and analyze the ensemble of tendencies that are
activated at this precise moment: this is what it means to account for
*mediating conjunctures*.[^6]

Servanne Monjour analyzes this complex mechanism of dialogue between
techniques, discourse and practice in the context of digital photography
by referring to 'remanence'.[^7] The idea of remanence allows a
reinterpretation of the notion of remediation as defined by Bolter and
Grusin in *Understanding New Media*, all while avoiding the major
pitfall of this essay, which is a certain teleological temptation that
we have already referred to. The impression we have when reading the two
media theoreticians (at least focusing on this landmark work) is that
the remediation phenomenon is part of a globally linear process. The
idea of remanence avoids this pitfall by producing unforeseeable and
intertwined non-linear processes. There is therefore remanence of
analogue structures in digital photography practices – such as, for
example, the 'analogue' effects of digital devices –, but there is, at
the same time, paradoxically, digital remanence in analogue practices.
For example, the idea of the virtual image was indeed the basis of
analogue photographic discourse: the negative is the virtual that is
then updated through a series of different prints. And yet this virtual
image seems retroactively borrowed from our ordinary digital image –
notably that of the Raw image file. We are faced with an element that is
established in reverse:

> Therefore, the conditions of conveying an idea participate entirely in
> its invention, even if it means integrating it, in reverse, into a
> tradition, that is, retroactively associating it with a meaning that
> it has perhaps not (yet) entirely had – or, in certain cases, that it
> did not have at all.[^8]

This approach therefore allows us to avoid a teleological vision of
media's progress. There is not, in other terms, a linear development of
all media that would become more and more transparent, for example, as
in the illustrious metaphor of the 'Black Box' that Henry Jenkins[^9]
denounces, as well as what we have seen in this chapter. The change of
mediatic practices often occurs following an oscillation of ideas and
tendencies that more or less have a strong influence on these practices
according to the moment in consideration. During a certain period, for
example, the notion of representation could be dominant enough to alter
artistic practices. The desire of representation as an action consists
in rendering present something that will no longer be, during a given
period, one of the forces that, for example, leads to making a painting
or to staging a theater play. This thirst for representation inevitably
generates the development of techniques and apparatus that allow us to
render present that which is not or, at least, to give us the illusion
– perspective, the *camera obscura*, photography, the phonograph, etc.
In their essay, *Remediation. Understanding New Media*, Bolter and
Grusin in this way attempt to identify the vast historical periods
wherein the principle of 'immediacy' was dominant, which we assimilate
with the representational system. But they are also interested in other
historical moments that they associate with hypermediacy, wherein this
desire is less evident. This is the case in the 20th and 21st
centuries, primarily in the visual arts field. The very concept of
representation competes with other aspects of artistic experience as in,
for example, life. If we think about the effects of the analogue that
digital photo software offers, it is clear that the desire of
representation has been replaced by other desires. Obviously, we cannot
think this reduction of want of representation as progress: criticizing
the idea of representation was fundamental in Plato's thinking, which
did not prevent a great comeback of *mimesis* in other historical
periods, as well as its decline in others. It really relates to an
oscillating movement. But this movement does not, as Bolter and Grusin
suggest, limit itself to two poles – namely, immediacy and
hypermediacy. In moving towards representation, other tendencies arise,
for example the tendency to create world hierarchies in structured
taxonomies, the tendency to organize complex linear structures, the
tendency to mathematize reality, or the tendency to create networks
(that we observe with the Romans, builders of road networks, with the
English *Railway mania* and *Canal mania*, with internet pioneers...).
We could identify an ensemble of tendencies to describe particular
mediating conjunctures. It is what we will do in the last chapter of
this work in an attempt to justify the mediating conjunctures that
crystallize today with a substantive adjective: 'the digital'.

It now remains to see how these forces and tendencies can be interpreted
not only as factors that frame and shape the action, but also, and above
all, as performative elements. This will be our focus in the following
pages.

## Performativity and Metaontology

Defining mediating conjunctures, as we have seen, can be misleading. To
grasp the moving forces that characterize the moment of an action, to
describe them, leads us back to giving a name to a context that
eventually becomes a particular *medium*. If we are capable of
identifying the spatial, symbolic or material characteristics of a given
moment, we must also be capable of naming this context, of freezing it,
and of making it a concept. In other words, it would be possible to say
that a particular ensemble of mediating conjunctures is theater, another
radio, another television, another writing on the computer... But in
this way, our interest in the notion of mediating conjunctures
disappears.

As we have seen, the intermedial approach tries to resolve this problem
by concentrating on the dynamic that leads to the production of
mediations rather than on the media itself. And yet with this approach,
one still runs risk of essentializing the process. Intermediality, in
fact, always runs the risk of becoming an ontology. We have shown that,
in the first phase of its history, intermediality would concentrate on
the idea of an in-between that in some way ends up essentializing the
poles that it sought to emancipate. If intermediality is what is found
between many media, from this arises an essentializing determination of
these media. In the *postmediatic approach*, one puts aside the idea of
medium and insists on the importance of the remediation dynamic and on
what Lars Elleström calls 'media transformation'. This movement, that
manifests as a result of a growing lack of differentiation between media
and an erasure of the barriers that demarcate them – think about a
television system and home cinema or current mobile phones and their
multifunctional qualities – is precisely what highlights the
centrality of mediation and medialities. It is otherwise on the basis of
these medialities that the transmedial dynamic is founded: the mediatic
contents are treated and distributed in accordance with specific
medialities. This indicates well that, if there are no longer media, we
are not in an unclear continuum where it would be impossible – even
unreasonable – to identify a particular mediatic situation.[^10]

If intermediality does participate in this performative shift marking
the end of the 20th century and the beginning of the 21st, the idea
of mediating conjunctures discussed here marks a crucial step in the
development of thinking about mediation, as well as that of
performativity. Intermediality is, above all, performative, regardless
of the period and regardless of the system – mediatic, postmediatic –
beneath which it manifests. By resorting to this idea of mediating
conjunctures, we advance reflection on performativity by reversing a
solidly entrenched logic. Our approach is not isolated, but part of a
larger movement that we could consider 'mediationist', that varies from
media theory (Galloway) to *new materialism* (De Landa, Braidotti) or to
Karen Barad's *agential realism*. According to Barad, 'reality is not
composed of things-in-themselves or things-behind-phenomena but
"things"-in-phenomena'.[^11] From this logical shift, and its
considerable repercussions, emerged the major concept of intra-activity.
Within the intermedial field that interests us, what we consider to be
mediating conjunctures largely corresponds to the intra-active dynamic
observed in agential realism. While mediatic intermediality relies on
interaction, postmediatic intermediality would rely on intra-action.
While the first assumes the pre-existence of predetermined independent
entities to be related to one another, it is on the other hand 'through
specific agential intra-actions that the boundaries and properties of
the "components" of phenomena become determinate and that particular
embodied concepts become meaningful'.[^12]

If mediating conjunctures are always something specific, the question
therefore arises: how do we consider the difference between one
mediating conjuncture in relation to another without falling into a
mediatic essentialism? In other words: is it possible to not abandon a
discussion on the specificities of certain mediating conjunctures
without adopting an essentialist approach?

We propose – more as a possible opening for future research than as a
genuine solution – adopting an approach that could be described as
'meta-ontological'. The core principle of metaontology is that Being is
always the result of the mediation process. Instead of thinking of a
Being in itself which is thereafter meditated to give way to a Being for
us, or a representational Being, metaontology considers mediations as
original.[^13] We could therefore adopt an ontological approach, which
aims to grasp the specificity of mediating conjunctures, without
renouncing their elusive nature. Indeed, the originality of mediations
implies an original multiplicity of Beings, and therefore a multiplicity
of ontologies.

Beyond falling into a unique definitional approach to ontology, which
crystallizes the real into stable concepts, metaontology positions
itself in ways other than that of ontology, in a way that allows us to
take into account the multiplicity of ontologies. This 'meta' must not
be interpreted as an overriding: metaontology takes into account the
multiplicity of ontologies without presenting itself as a super-system,
precisely because it recognizes the irreducibility of different
ontologies. From a metaontological point of view, the real is a dynamic
of entwined ontological planes. There is no essence of things, but a
plurality of essences that encroach upon one another. There is no Being,
but a plurality of multiple-beings. In accepting this original and
irreducible multiplicity, we consider metaontology a performative
discourse on the essences whose entwined dynamic constitutes as the real
– or, more precisely, the reals.

According to a metaontological approach, what we say, here and now, on
mediating conjunctures is one of many interactions that determine its
emergence. But this emergence is always tied to a precise context that
makes the essence of mediating conjunctures plural and dynamic.
Metaontology is therefore a performative discourse that is here at this
very instant of writing. What is produced then – this writing that is a
discourse on mediating conjunctures – is metaontology. Metaontology is
found in mediating conjunctures and, at the same time, it produces it.
The fact that at this very moment we write, produces the very meaning of
this writing. However, we are in the process of speaking of mediating
conjunctures – we are in the process of trying to grasp them. But this
act, as a metaontological act, is not an attempt to pin down or
crystallize them: we do not define mediating conjunctures. We express
them. We express them because the mediating conjunctures that we are in
the process of talking about are nothing more than the ensemble that is
in the process of being produced in the very instant that we are in the
process of writing. These mediating conjunctures are, at the same time,
the product and the condition of possibility of that which is in the
process of happening while we write. Metaontology is the act of
expressing, in a space detached from ontologies, that which is produced
at the very moment of this discourse. At the same time, it is entirely
thrown into the flow of reality and detached from the discrete time that
founds the possibility of essences.

The metaontological approach can therefore take into account the
dynamics, oscillating between performativity and identifying mediating
conjunctures, and help us to characterize mediatic practices without
reducing them to fixed and essential units. This leads us to analyze the
process of naturalization which presents itself as the inevitable
aftermath of any performative gesture. This is covered in the following
chapter.

[^1]: Ollivier Dyens, *Enfanter l'inhumain: le refus du vivant*,
    Montréal: Triptyque, 2012.

[^2]: Matteo Treleani, 'Le spectre et l'automate. Deux figures du
    spectateur', in *D'un écran à l'autre. Les mutations du spectateur*,
    Delavaud, G. Chateauvert, J., Harmattan, 2016.

[^3]: The notion of mediating conjunctures, as we conceive of it, could
    be likened to that of the 'cultural series' developed by Gaudreault
    and Marion., André Gaudreault and Philippe Marion, *The End of
    Cinema? A Medium in Crisis in the Digital Age*, New York: Columbia
    University Press, 2015. What we are trying to highlight with our
    expression is the dispersed aspect of mediating conjunctures: a
    multiplicity of mediation elements that cannot – or not necessarily
    – be classified and organized into a single 'series'. To identify
    the development trajectories that would be the most important, or
    more noteworthy than others, in fact risks returning to a form of
    essentialism. The utility of the cultural series is that it finds a
    relationship between different media experiences that can be
    integrated into the same history. In the case of mediating
    conjunctures, it is not a matter of accepting that every history of
    each media practice is only one of many avenues of possible
    interpretations.

[^4]: Regarding this aspect, see Maurizio Ferraris, *Documentality: Why
    It Is Necessary to Leave Traces*, trans. by Richard Davies, 1
    edition, New York: Fordham University Press, 2012.

[^5]: Eric Méchoulan, 'Intermédialité, ou comment penser les
    transmissions', *Fabula Colloques*, 2017
    http://www.fabula.org/colloques/document4278.php [accessed 29
    May 2018\].

[^6]: As opposed to cultural series, mediating conjunctures insist that
    we account for the multiplicity of elements present at the moment of
    the action: there are multiple histories relating to the many
    different elements. One cannot include the ensemble of mediating
    conjunctures in a continuous series. If a link exists between
    cultural series and mediating conjunctures, it is that the latter
    can be thought of as the crossing over of different cultural series.

[^7]: Servanne Monjour, *Mythologies postphotographiques: l'invention
    littéraire de l'image numérique*, Montréal: PUM, 2018
    http://parcoursnumeriques-pum.ca/introduction-158.

[^8]: Monjour, *Mythologies postphotographiques: l'invention littéraire
    de l'image numérique*, p. 146.

[^9]: Henry Jenkins, *Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media
    Collide*, Revised edition, New York: NYU Press, 2008, p. 13.

[^10]: See, for example Rosi Braidotti, *The Posthuman*, Cambridge, UK ;
    Malden, MA, USA: Polity Press, 2013. and Manuel De Landa,
    *Assemblage Theory*, Speculative Realism, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
    University Press, 2016.

[^11]: Karen Barad, 'Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an
    Understanding of How Matter Comes to Matter', *Signs: Journal of
    Women in Culture and Society*, 28.3 (2003), 801-31 (p. 817)
    https://doi.org/10.1086/345321.

[^12]: Barad, 'Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of
    How Matter Comes to Matter', p. 815.

[^13]: This point can be understood in line with the agential realism of
    Karen Barad, *Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the
    Entanglement of Matter and Meaning*, Second Printing edition,
    Durham: Duke University Press Books, 2007 : instead of opposing
    agency and structures (p. 26), Barad proposes that we consider the
    ontological value of these entanglements.
