---
Pr-id: Publications
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 31
Type: book
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: Media Do Not Exist. Performativity and mediating conjunctures
Article-status: accepted
Author: Jean-Marc Larrue, Marcello Vitali-Rosati
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Mediating Conjunctures and Mediation

In the previous chapter, we explained why we prefer 'mediating
conjunctures' to the concept of 'medium', which still dominates media
studies and communications. We propose this shift not only because of
the growing difficulty of defining an individual medium but also, more
generally, in response to the complexity of mediation phenomena as they
manifest themselves in the present day. This is not a matter of
tinkering with our conceptual apparatus to account for a more elusive
reality. What is at stake is our ability to develop new tools to better
grasp the scope of the mediation processes – of which we are, in one way
or another, the agents – and the issues they raise.

In this chapter, we will continue our discussion of mediating
conjunctures, focussing on what they produce, namely mediation *per se*.
Our purpose is to show how this conceptual shift fits into a broad
epistemological renewal rooted in a new way of thinking about ourselves
as human beings acting in the world.

We will follow the same route as in Chapter 1, beginning with an
overview of the mechanisms at work in any mediation process, as
understood during the mediatic period of intermedial thinking, and then
looking at the model's shortcomings and why we need to move beyond it to
grasp the nature of mediation in the postmediatic age and its associated
issues. We will conclude by proposing a new definition of mediation,
that is, by describing what occurs when a set of mediating conjunctures
is operative.

## Historical Perspectives on Mediation: Individuation, Naturalization and Sociomedialities

While resisting the essentialist temptation to posit historically
specific phenomena as ahistorical constants, we cannot ignore the hold
that words have on our way of being in the world. Indeed, we would say
that their relative stability is, in many ways, the mainstay of
community life. We communicate a fluid reality using frozen forms, a
tension that parallels the paradox of flux and the photogram, the
contradiction between the flow of lived reality and the limited, static
representation captured by a snapshot. We include these two dimensions,
the communicational and the representational, in this brief historical
overview advisedly, for they are the site of the fundamental problems
for the concept of mediation today.

Historically, mediation has consisted of differentiating what would
otherwise be undifferentiated and indissociable from an amorphous mass
or flow. Any mediation is accompanied by a process of singularization,
or what we have been calling discretization. We can identify two types
of discretization processes: polarization and individuation. Both are
discursive in nature.

Polarization splits a segment of reality in two: it creates a polarity
between two elements that are placed in opposition to form a binary
structure. The segmentation of reality that it effects is clearly
arbitrary and not rooted in any 'natural' necessity, for reality is
continuous. Polarization is the foundation of the general laws of logic:
the principles of non-contradiction and excluded middle. It cannot be
day and night at once (principle of non-contradiction), for language
identifies night with not-day. It's either day or night; there is no
third option (principle of excluded middle).

The second form of discretization of reality is individuation. Richard
Grusin, the coauthor of *Remediation: Understanding New Media*, which we
have discussed[^05chapter4_1] and to which we shall return, defines mediation as
'the process, action, or event that generates or provides the conditions
for the emergence of subjects and objects, for the individuation of
entities within the world'.[^05chapter4_2]

Such entities can be constituted only if we take a section of the whole,
isolate it, and consider it as a unit in and of itself. This entails
drawing a precise line through the continuity of reality. Quantitative
measurements are one example: a litre is a discrete part carved out of a
continuous mass. The litre is 'individuated', separated from the rest.
In the case of units of measurement, the demarcation is entirely
arbitrary. In others, it may be based on characteristic features made
salient by the process of polarization: referring to mammals focuses
attention on certain characteristics of animals, to the exclusion of all
others. The concept of medium arises precisely from such a process of
individuation, starting from the dynamic and complex reality of
practices.

By practices, we mean characteristics that are common to different
actions. Agent A performs action X, agent B performs action Y. Actions X
and Y are enmeshed in a series of elements: a context (C), a space (S),
a time (T), a set of ideas and values (I), technological devices (D) and
so forth. When one or more of these elements are the same or similar,
when they converge, we can speak of a practice.

Let us say, for example, that actions X and Y share C and D. We then
have a practice we may call CD. If, at 4 p.m. on April 4, Luca (L) takes
a photo of Montreal from the lookout on Mount Royal (action X), and at 8
a.m. on June 20, Jean takes a photo of the Eiffel Tower from the
Champ-de-Mars (action Y), there are some common features to the two
actions. Similar devices were used (even if we don't know the specific
cameras with which Luca and Jean took their photos); in both cases a
cityscape was photographed; and so forth. We may therefore speak of a
'photographic' practice.

Clearly, practices can be organized into broader or more precise
categories, depending on the elements taken into consideration. 'Vermeer
paints a view of Delft in 1660' (action Z) could be said to share some
elements with the two previous actions. We could then speak of a
'cityscape representation practice'. Or we could specify that Luca and
Jean took their photographs with smartphones and define the practice as
'smartphone photography'.

Specifying the common thread by which media practices are defined
constitutes the individuation process for that practice. Once a set of
practices has been individuated, it can be assigned a name, understood
and interpreted as a unit. This is the process that leads to the
identification of what we call 'theater', 'radio', 'television', 'music'
and 'cinema', to name just a few examples.

In this sense, the practices we include under the rubric 'cinema' are
not discontinuous with the ones we call 'photography' or 'theater'. The
discontinuity resides in the names we assign to them, which are produced
by a process of discretization.

The arbitrary nature of these processes would be less problematic were
it not for the fact that they are a way of structuring reality. As we
have said, polarization and individuation are products of language. This
observation takes us back to the performative dimension of language. As
Austin demonstrated, language does more than convey messages; it 'does'
things in the world and, in a way, creates reality. But more than this,
the process of discretization also has an institutionalizing effect.
Discourse not only produces the entities it names, but it endows them
with an institutional existence and an ontological status. Certainly,
the institutionalizing effect is not automatic: it isn't enough to name
a polarity or an individuality for it to attain an institutional
existence. The discourse that produces the discretization must
circulate, must be shared, and must stabilize: it must always say more
or less the same thing (or at least give the impression of doing
so).[^05chapter4_3]

To return to the example of units of measure, the definition of a meter
is not rooted in any necessity: the same distance could be measured in
inches, or leagues, or miles. But a discourse emerged, first in the
scientific community, then in business practices, and eventually became
the standard, in some communities, and stabilized. The
institutionalization of a discretization process is bound up with
specific, and yet shifting mediating conjunctures that are at once its
original environment and its product. Obviously, one could propose a
different unit of measure and challenge the institutionalization of the
meter, but before another institutionalization process can take hold, it
would have to stabilize and be shared across the community in question.
Applied to media, institutionalization is the discursive process of
discretization that results in the emergence of a medium.

The stabilization of discourse, which completes the institutionalization
process, triggers another important phenomenon: the 'naturalization' of
the discretization and its transformation into something ageless. This
is accomplished when the discretization no longer needs to be justified,
when it no longer appears tied to cultural variables, but instead seems
to belong to the natural order of things.

In the case of media, a naturalized medium becomes a fixture of its
users' daily lived environment. In *When Old Technologies Were New*,[^05chapter4_4]
Carolyn Marvin provides a striking example of how a medium becomes
naturalized. She describes how the telephone entered the daily lives of
a steadily growing congregation of individuals (in homes, businesses and
organizations of all kinds), how it changed their lives and transformed
its users. She notes that it is always a small group of initiates that
promotes a new technology. At first, they are the only ones to master
its use and realize its utility. But unlike other types of knowledge,
this 'technological literacy' does not establish a permanent elite, for
it soon comes to be widely shared.[^05chapter4_5]

At the level of the user, naturalization has the effect of blurring the
distinction between the human and the non-human. Marshall McLuhan
defined media as 'extensions of man',[^05chapter4_6] but when media usage protocols
are assimilated by users to the extent of becoming automatic, it is hard
to say where the extension begins. Naturalization renders the mediation
transparent to the user of the medium. Saying 'hello' or 'I'm hanging
up', dialling a number, hearing a voice (or not) after several rings,
all belong to a body of knowledge that transmutes into a set of reflexes
on the part of the telephone user. These protocols might be expected to
accentuate the opacity of the mediation process, but instead they create
a transparent effect as a result of their assimilation by the user. The
varieties of opacification discussed in Chapter 1, exemplified by the
radiophonic voice that exposes the artifice of the theatrical voice, may
be understood as processes of 'denaturalization' (of what had previously
been naturalized).

We have been using the term 'sociomedialities' to describe these
specific socialities that give rise to media practices. Clearly, the
naturalization of discretization processes tends to render the
sociomedial dimensions of some individual and collective behaviours
commonplace or even invisible. It might be concluded that the concept is
not useful, since sociomedialities inevitably collapse into socialities.
But it must be borne in mind that 'new media', or new dominant trends
within mediating conjunctures are always appearing and disturbing users'
behaviours.

## Postmediatic Perspectives

Two points that emerge from this overview of mediation are worth noting.
The first is its anthropocentric nature. Everything revolves around the
(human) user, of whom media are understood as an extension. The
non-human, including technology, is subject to the human and serves to
increase human capabilities. This anthropocentrism breeds an
anthropomorphism that may well be called into question.

The second point is the pivotal position of language in this conception
of mediation. Language is central to the naming of the things we
singularize and to the new environment thereby created. These two
tendencies, anthropocentrism and logocentrism, are at the heart of
current debates in intermediality.

As we saw in Chapter 3, for mediation to exist there must be a
combination of elements that we have called 'mediating conjunctures'. A
notable feature of these elements, in addition to their shifting and
partly random nature, is their heterogeneity, consisting, as they do, of
human and non-human agents and variegated entities and phenomena. This
defining characteristic of mediating conjunctures stems from their
instability, their diversity and the fact that they are not exactly
reproducible. To Bolter and Grusin's contention that there is no
original mediation, we might add that any mediation is always new, or
better still there is never a mediation that is identifiable as such,
but always mediating conjunctures.

But this perpetual novelty is itself variable in scope and intensity. In
a given space of time – and both time and space may be extended – the
degree of novelty may be relatively weak, and mediating conjunctures may
be grouped together on the basis of similarities, or what Wittgenstein
called 'family resemblance'. Likenesses of this kind ground categories
such as the arts, which have been distinguished from other types of
mediation and also divided into subcategories, such as the temporal arts
and the spatial arts, or distinguished on the basis of certain aspects
of the devices they employ, such as the use of words, musical notes,
drawings, etc. These entities were then named and organized into a
hierarchy, which has changed over time.[^05chapter4_7] Of course, the essentialist
naming of the conjunctures not only discretizes, but also reifies them,
concealing to some degree their fundamental and dynamic characteristics.

What is true of the arts applies as well to media. The term 'medium' as
we refer to the it here was, in the late 19th century, both of the need
to distinguish traditional representational practices – the arts – from
new practices in which the non-human occupied a hitherto unknown role
(thanks to the growing use of electricity and the fast-paced development
of sound and image reproduction technologies). This revolution in
agency, by which we mean the scope and nature of the role that various
agents play in mediation processes, did not occur without friction.
Resistance sprang up, nourished by explicitly anti-mechanical and
technophobic discourses, often tinged with nostalgia. In the 1930s,
while Henri Gouhier was seeking the 'essence' of theater (in our terms,
a nexus of mediating conjunctures that is stable over time) in the live
and 'real' co-presence of actor and spectator, independent of any
technical mediation, Walter Benjamin was developing the concept of the
aura (which can be understood as a specific quality of certain forms of
mediation that weakens with the intercession of non-human agents,
mechanical or technological).

Postmediatic intermediality reflects the mediation processes it
describes: it not only takes note of the role of the non-human in
mediation, but strives to understand how the human and non-human are
intertwined, by a logic other than the subjection of one to the other.
Intermedial research on contemporary theater (in which technology
figures prominently in the form of reproduced images on the stage, the
use of microphones, sound environments, etc.) is a good example. From
the outset, the intermedial approach was distinguished by its concern
with what was then called the materiality of media, and it made an
important contribution to re-evaluating the role of the non-human in the
development and operation of mediating conjunctures. The new value it
ascribed to the non-human represented a departure from the
anthropocentric conception of technology inherited from McLuhan.[^05chapter4_8]
Considerable effort was devoted to understanding the specific dynamic of
the non-human and its modes of interaction with human agents. A prime
example is the research on virtual reality, and on synthetic characters.
At the same time, the admission of the non-human considerably expanded
the already vast arena in which mediating conjunctures are produced and
operate. This necessarily brings us back to the foundation of all
mediation: its performative character and the nature of that
performativity.

## The Formless: Beyond Language

A few years before Gouhier embarked on his quest for the constants that
define theater and endow it with a specific 'essence', and Benjamin
began framing his intuited 'aura' in theoretical terms, the French
writer Georges Bataille decried the unhappy effect of words on our
perception of the world. To elude their reifying and reductive power,
Bataille proposed a new kind of dictionary, one that 'would begin from
the point at which it no longer rendered the meanings of words but
rather their tasks'.[^05chapter4_9]

Beyond his distrust of words, Bataille's aim was to free humans from the
grip of the sign and the inseparability of signifier and signified, the
cornerstone of the then-ascendant structuralist school in linguistics.
Bataille refused to collapse the totality of experience into our
acquaintance with the invented forms that are words and their meanings.
The paradox Bataille confronted is the same as the one we have discussed
in preceding chapters: the words that are supposed to describe the world
mask it in the act of description. The result, complains Bataille, is a
radical disjunction between the linguistic sur-reality that is supposed
to represent the world and reality itself, to which language, with its
limitations, cannot gain access. What interested Bataille, though, was
not so much the limits of language, as reality itself, the object of his
quest. He called it 'the formless', a notion he developed in the margins
of and in connection with the surrealist movement. Formlessness was an
attempt, then, to speak the ungraspable, and the concept opens the door
to what might be called a poetics of the unexpressed.

Bataille provides no satisfactory illustration of the formless,[^05chapter4_10]
nor, of course, any clear, stable definition of the concept, which would
have been a logical contradiction. But some characteristics recur in his
discussions of the notion: it is heterogeneous, ungraspable and a
process.

This last point is particularly interesting for the intermedial
approach. It recalls Aristotle's view of matter as an undifferentiated
mass that is individuated and rendered recognizable and classifiable by
form. Bataille plainly had this in mind, as the entry for 'formless' in
his *Dictionnaire critique* makes clear: 'Thus *formless* is not only an
adjective with a given meaning but a term which declassifies, generally
requiring that each thing take on a form'.[^05chapter4_11] The act of
declassification therefore demands both the presence and negation of
form: the formless is not just the absence of form but also, at the same
time and inseparably, its active suppression. From this perspective,
then, the formless possesses a destructive dimension that is,
paradoxically, also a gateway to something else. Bataille's dictionary
would 'no longer \[render\] the meanings of words but rather their
tasks'[^05chapter4_12] and it was through those tasks that the reader, listener or
spectator would open up to the presence of the formless and experience
it. The formless contains a strong performative vein even as it calls
for a redefinition of agency.

But at the heart of Bataille's liberation struggle is not so much this
aspect, but rather his distrust of words. He wants, first and foremost,
to wrestle himself free of the exclusive authority of the sign and the
signifier/signified pairing which, in limiting and imprisoning the
formless, reifies it and substitutes it for the plenitude of experience,
and the company of human language, an invented form that is at once
arbitrary, reductive and plural. In conceiving formlessness, Bataille
not only rejects the cohesion of the sign but discredits the efficacy of
all representation, viewed as autarkic, self-constructed, narcissistic
artifice in the final analysis. In other words, signs (particularly but
not exclusively linguistic signs) are tools for the subjugation of the
non-human to the human. It is this anthropomorphic, anthropocentric
dimension of form, and the self-containment it effects that Georges
Didi-Huberman underscores in *La ressemblance humaine ou le gai savoir
selon George Bataille*.[^05chapter4_13]

A startlingly inventive writer though he was, Bataille was unable to
describe the formless other than by what it is not. It's easy to see
why: how can one say the unsayable within the bounds of language? This
question marks the limits of the logical framework within which Bataille
was operating, namely the logocentric outlook for which language is the
privileged means of apprehending the world and all that exists that can
be apprehended by language. While Bataille had the intuition that there
was something beyond communication, he did not move beyond a preliminary
stage of reflection, one that consisted not so much of blazing new
trails towards the vast continent of the formless, as of dismantling the
routes that do not lead there. His enterprise heralds the great debates
that would attend the rise and fall of semiotics – and of linguistics in
general – but its lasting importance resides mainly in this fundamental
and fraught question, precisely because it is counterintuitive: what is
the undifferentiated? To ask this question also involves asking how the
undifferentiated is to be mediated, regardless of whether it was always
undifferentiated or became so when detached from human language.

These questions raised by Bataille nearly a century ago are at the
center of today's intermedial debates and they are key to uncovering the
workings of the mediating conjunctures at the heart of our discussion
here. The concepts of 'radical mediation' and 'excommunication' that
have been advanced recently, and the issues surrounding the
naturalization of mediation processes and their artefacts that we
discuss here, attest to the currency of Bataille's questions today and
to the counterintuitive character of postmediatic intermediality.

## Radical Mediation: Updating the Remediation Model

In Chapter 1, we looked at some limitations of the remediation model and
showed how other, non-transformational dynamics could connect mediating
practices such as hypermediality and transmediality. Independently
pursuing his investigation of mediation processes that had begun with
Jay D. Bolter, Richard Grusin has returned to the remediation model in
order to clarify some of its basic features. Notwithstanding the modesty
of this claim, the changes he has proposed to the model are substantial
and contribute to a renewed conception of mediation, which Bataille
would have undoubtedly welcomed. Grusin's reconsideration of the key
remedial concepts of transparency, immediacy, opacity and hypermediacy
produced the essay *Premediation:* *Affect and Mediality After 9/11* in
2010 and then the substantive article 'Radical Mediation' in 2015.

During the 16 years between the publication of *Remediation:
Understanding New Media* and 'Radical Mediation', Grusin disentangled
the concepts of transparency and immediacy that had been bound together
in the category 'transparent immediacy'. This is a turning point, for
with this move Grusin frees mediation from the representational yoke to
which he and Bolter had originally tied it to. This liberated mediation
is what he calls 'radical mediation'. And Grusin goes further still. He
argues that immediacy is limited neither to the products of mediation,
nor to its erasure – *i.e.*, its transparency – and, what's more, that
it is mediation itself that is immediate: 'Mediation is not opposed to
immediacy but rather is itself immediate'.[^05chapter4_14]

Grusin returns – or rather relegates – the two-pronged concept of
transparent immediacy to an instance of 'media correlationism', which
might be regarded as an updated version of the historical notion of a
copy's fidelity to the original. Likening transparent immediacy to a
theory that originates in the speculative realist school is a momentous
shift that marks a radical turn in Grusin's thinking. More notably
still, Grusin expands the definition of mediation from an in-between to
a general process of differentiation of all things in the world, human
and non-human.

How does this major amendment to the remediation model by one of its
authors help advance thinking about mediating conjunctures? In two ways.
First, it tacks towards performativity. Grusin's 'immediate mediation'
now includes what might be called 'intransitive mediation' – that is,
mediation that essentially refers to nothing beyond what occurs at the
moment of mediation: no model is transmitted, no pre-existing before or
elsewhere is summoned in the here and now of the mediation.

Secondly, and paradoxically, this development leads to an impasse that,
while not invalidating the remediation model, limits its scope and, most
importantly, forces us to rethink mediation. In solving one problem, the
model's confinement within the realms of representational logic, Grusin
creates another, one that is highly instructive. He says: 'Where
remediation focused largely on the visual aspects of mediation, radical
mediation would take into account the entire human sensorium'.[^05chapter4_15] This
passage and others from the landmark article suggest that, like Bolter,
Grusin has trouble conceiving visual mediation outside of
representational logic, which is why he entirely abandons the concept of
opacity – it is never mentioned in the article – and also why he
concludes that immediacy makes the concept of transparency inoperative
and useless. However, stating that mediation is immediate is
insufficient for defining it. By excluding the interplay between
transparency and opacity from the scope of his inquiry, Grusin forgoes
an essential analytic tool.

Let us compare a tightrope walker and a magic show. In both cases,
unless the performance contains an overlaid narrative that refers to
something beyond itself, the mediation is intransitive: the circus
performer walks the tightrope, the magician performs his trick. It all
happens in the here and now of the show. But there is a basic difference
between the two: we assume there is no trick to the high-wire act, and
yet we constantly seek one in the magic show, as we know it exists.
What, then, do we see in these performances? In the first, we see
everything; in the second, everything except the thing we're looking
for, even though it's there. The magic show is a paradoxical show of not
showing: we see that we don't see. So this is not opacity as it is
understood in the classic representational paradigm, an opacity that
obscures, masks or, in Zola's terms, 'distorts' that which ought to be
represented transparently. In this case, nothing is being re-presented:
there is only live presence. This show of not showing, this 'aesthetics
of the impossible' as Darwin Ortiz calls it,[^05chapter4_16] rests on partial,
willful masking of basic elements of the mediation. Even as it reveals
itself, the specific mediation of the magic show eludes the spectator.

Continuing the comparison, we can say that, in the high-wire act, the
mediation is intransitive, immediate and transparent, since we see
everything there is to see. Or at least that is how we experience it. In
the magic show, the mediation is more subtle and complex: we can see
that we don't see, which is why we cannot speak of opacity in this case,
for in a magic show as in any show, we cannot see nothing. If there is
neither opacity nor transparency, as we are not within a
representational logic, what are we dealing with? We are dealing with an
opacity that is not opaque and which, paradoxically, lets us see that we
don't see. The process that unfolds in the magic show might be called
'inopaque'. Inopacity is, in a way, the operative concept in the
aesthetics of the impossible which Ortiz refers to.

The concept of radical mediation is of considerable heuristic value.
Situating immediacy within mediation itself, as Grusin suggests, rather
than in the product of the mediation, is a major historical departure.
If mediation consists in endowing objects in the world with an
anthropomorphic aspect by re-presenting them, radical mediation
establishes a different, more direct or immediate relationship with the
world, which could be called formless since it does not rest on form.

It is unfortunate, however, that Grusin has exchanged one indissoluble
pair (transparent immediacy) for another (the immediacy of mediation),
thereby excluding the possibility of other combinations. While it was
necessary to situate mediation within a wider logic than that of
representation, the persistence of the representational mode of
mediation in all its forms, particularly in the arts and performance, is
something that we must accommodate for.

## Mediation as Excommunication

Alexander R. Galloway was one of the fiercest critics of Bolter and
Grusin's remediation model and a prolific proponent of abandoning the
concept of medium in favor of mediation. Today, the majority of
intermedialists subscribe to his formula: 'not media, but mediation'. In
2014, he published *Excommunication: Three Inquiries in Media and
Mediation*, co-authored with two other New York media theoreticians,
Eugene Thacker and McKenzie Wark. The book opens with an apparently
innocuous question that directly echoes Bataille's reflections: 'Does
everything that exists, exist to be presented and represented, to be
mediated and remediated, to be communicated and translated?'[^05chapter4_17] A
series of examples from various spheres leads them quickly and
predictably to answer in the negative, which raises a second question:
how, then, do we know that something exists? And a third: how can
something still be transmitted; in other words, how is it that something
is mediated?

Rehashing their argument in detail would be irrelevant here, but it
unquestionably represents another significant advance in intermedial
thinking about mediation and effects a major paradigm shift: while
Grusin has released mediation from the representational cage to which he
and Bolter had confined it, he still keeps it penned within the
perimeter of communication – a larger enclosure, to be sure, but an
enclosure nonetheless. Galloway and his co-authors go further by
proposing to remove mediation from the communicative framework. Just as
Grusin showed that the representational schema is only one remediation
model among many, Galloway et al. suggest that communication is only one
mode of mediation; it is neither the principle nor the matrix of
mediation: 'We aim, therefore, to craft not so much a theory of
mediation in terms of communication, for which there already exist a
number of exemplars, but a theory of mediation as excommunication'.[^05chapter4_18]

What, then, is this 'mediation as excommunication' that operates outside
communication, *i.e.*, outside strictly human communication (as it has
been conceived until now), and that encompasses the human and non-human
without distinction? It is 'a double movement in which the
communicational imperative is expressed, and expressed as the
impossibility of communication'.[^05chapter4_19] What they are referring to is not
the absence of a message or an interrupted communication; neither is it
a performative failure of mediation, since something, they insist, is
still being mediated. We don't know what, but we sense it, just as, in a
magic show, we see that we don't see, without (theoretically) knowing
what it is we're not seeing.

What the three authors of *Excommunication* are trying to articulate
corresponds, in many respects, to Bataille's project. As we know, media
theory originally revolved around what was thought to be a universal
communicative process, the best-known model being Shannon and Weaver's
classic scheme.[^05chapter4_20] Their 1948 model is based on a one-way, linear,
structural conception of communication. It breaks down (we would say
'discretizes') processes into sequences, including encoding and
decoding, and the agents, human and non-human, who perform them. The
model follows the 'message' through successive stages, from the
'information source' and the 'sender' to the 'receiver'.

The proposal Galloway and his colleagues make does not overcome the
difficulty Bataille encountered in defining the formless and modeling
its dynamics. This does not, however, vitiate its value, for it in fact
unveils a new stage in debates about intermediality and mediation. Just
as we can regard mediation as excommunication – that is, understand it
outside the communicative framework – we can speak of excommunicating
mediating conjunctures – *i.e.*, instances of mediation that are located
outside the classic model and hence cannot be explained by it. Thacker
calls these types of mediation 'Dark Media'. It might be suggested that
the magic show, with its 'inopacity', is a salient example. The function
of what might be called 'dark mediating conjunctures', which rub
shoulders with more traditional mediating conjunctures, no longer aims
to make the inaccessible accessible or to connect what is separate:
'Instead, media reveal inaccessibility in and of itself – they make
accessible the inaccessible – in its inaccessibility'.[^05chapter4_21]

## Conclusion

Georges Bataille forcefully defended the idea of a pervasive
formlessness from which humans have cut themselves off by the very means
they use to mediate it. They seek other paths, but find none to this
formlessness untouched by any discretization, for they remain imprisoned
in a logocentric logic. What they glimpse remains within the realm of
communication and can be expressed and transmitted only by their means.

The slow process of maturation that led Richard Grusin to a 'radical'
form of mediation is the most important change in the theory of
remediation to date. Breaking with the deep-rooted and widespread notion
that the function of media, like that of the arts, is to 'represent', an
idea that undergirds the remediation model, Grusin abandons the
representational paradigm and casts mediation as experience in the first
instance. In this case, what counts is the immediate, the mediation, not
its product.

Excommunication is the most recent development in thinking about
mediation: communication is one form of mediation but not the only one,
nor the most effective. Grusin has emancipated the varieties of
mediation from the confines of representation; Galloway, Thacker and
Wark have situated them beyond the limits of communication, in the
region where Georges Bataille sought the formless.

Conceiving of mediating conjunctures as other than representational
practices that translate the world into human language, accepting the
inaccessible in its inaccessibility and experiencing it as such,
constitutes a decisive double break in the development of what we call
postmediatic intermediality, and describes a new way of being in the
world and living together in and with the world.

[^05chapter4_1]: See Chapter 1.

[^05chapter4_2]: Richard Grusin, 'Radical Mediation', *Critical Inquiry*, 42.1
    (2015), 124-48 (pp. 137-38) https://doi.org/10.1086/682998.

[^05chapter4_3]: Ian Hacking gave an example of the institutionalization of
    discourse in 2005, in his Philosophy and History of Scientific
    Concepts course at the Collège de France. He discussed the process
    by which certain medical categories (obesity, autism) become
    institutionalized. He argued that statistical discourse and the
    scientific community's definition become operational only when a
    group of people begin to recognize themselves in those categories.
    Hacking identifies at least four moments in the process: (1)
    classification, (2) people, (3) institutions and (4) expert
    knowledge and popular knowledge. His lecture is available online at
    https://www.college-de-france.fr/media/ian-hacking/UPL6120975782849689510\_Hacking2004\_2005.pdf\]{.underline}\](https://www.college-de-france.fr/media/ian-hacking/UPL6120975782849689510\_Hacking2004\_2005.pdf.
    \[Retrieved on 29 May, 2018\].

[^05chapter4_4]: Carolyn Marvin, *When Old Technologies Were New: Thinking About
    Electric Communication in the Late Nineteenth Century*, Nachdr.,
    Ill, 1990.

[^05chapter4_5]: Marvin calls this process 'technological literacy as social
    currency'. Marvin, *When Old Technologies Were New: Thinking About
    Electric Communication in the Late Nineteenth Century*, p. 9 ff.

[^05chapter4_6]: Marshall MCLuhan, *Understanding Media*, New York: Signet, 1966.

[^05chapter4_7]: During the Romantic period, for example, music was often
    considered the highest art form.

[^05chapter4_8]: Only insofar as McLuhan relegated the non-human to an extension of
    the human, as we have noted.

[^05chapter4_9]: Dominic Faccini and others, 'Critical Dictionary', *October*, 60
    (1992), 25-31 (p. 27) https://doi.org/10.2307/779027.

[^05chapter4_10]: In general terms, he suggests the examples of the earthworm, the
    spider and the spittle.

[^05chapter4_11]: Faccini and others, 'Critical Dictionary', p. 27.

[^05chapter4_12]: Faccini and others, 'Critical Dictionary', p. 27.

[^05chapter4_13]: Georges Didi-Huberman, *La ressemblance informe: ou le gai savoir
    visuel selon Georges Bataille*, 2019.

[^05chapter4_14]: Grusin, 'Radical Mediation', p. 129.

[^05chapter4_15]: Grusin, 'Radical Mediation', p. 132.

[^05chapter4_16]: Darwin Ortiz, *The Annotated Erdnase*, Pasadena, Calif: Magical
    Publications, 1991.

[^05chapter4_17]: *Excommunication: Three Inquiries in Media and Mediation*, ed. by
    Alexander R. Galloway, Eugene Thacker, and McKenzie Wark, Trios,
    Chicago; London: The University of Chicago Press, 2014, p. 10.

[^05chapter4_18]: Galloway, Thacker, and Wark, *Excommunication: Three Inquiries in
    Media and Mediation*, p. 11.

[^05chapter4_19]: Eugene Thacker, 'Dark Media', in *Excommunication: Three
    Inquiries in Media and Mediation*, ed. by Alexander R. Galloway,
    McKenzie Wark, and Eugene Thacker, Trios, Chicago; London: The
    University of Chicago Press, 2014, p. 80.

[^05chapter4_20]: John R. Pierce, *An Introduction to Information Theory: Symbols,
    Signals & Noise*, 2nd, rev. ed, New York: Dover Publications, 1980.

[^05chapter4_21]: Thacker, 'Dark Media', p. 96.
